

            የፍትህ ሚኒስትሩ ባቀረቡት የይታገድልኝ ጥያቄ ለ15 ቀናት ከእስር ቤት ተለቀቁ

      The Minister of Justice was Released for 15 days on his request of Obstruction 

  የፌዴራል መጀመሪያ ደረጃ ፍ/ቤት ሦስተኛ ፍትሐብሔር ችሎት የፍትሕ ሚኒስትሩ አቶ ወረደወልድ ወልዴ በማረፊያ ቤት እንዲቆዩ የሰጠውን ትዕዛዝ ተከሳሹ ባቀረቡት የይታገድልኝ ጥያቄ መሰረት ለ15 ቀናት ጊዜ ተሰጥቷቸው ከእስር መለቀቃቸውን የፍርድ ቤቱ ፕሬዝዳንት አስታወቁ።

The order the Federal First Instance Court third Civil code court session gave to arrest the minister, Mr. Weredeweld, was held based on the request of obstruction the accused presented and was given a release for 15 days, the president of the court disclosed.  

  ፕሬዝዳንቱ አቶ ደሳለኝ በርሄ ትናንት ለኢዜአ እንዳስታወቁት ፍርድ ቤቱ በአቶ ወረደወልድ ወልዴ ላይ የሰጠውን የማሰሪያ ትዕዛዝ ለ15 ቀናት እንዲቆይ ፕሬዝዳንቱ ያገዱት የፍትሐብሔር ሕጉ በሚፈቅደው መሰረት ነው።

The president Mr. Kesalegn Berhe yesterday disclosed to ENA that the he obstructed the order the court passed to arrest Mr. Weredewold Wolde based on the civil code. 

ሚኒስትሩ የመጀመሪያ ደረጃ ፍርድ ቤት 3ኛ የፍትሐ ብሔር ችሎት እንዲታሰር የሰጠው ትዕዛዝ ተገቢ ስላልሆነና ጉዳዩም ይግባኝ ጠይቄበት በከፍተኛ ፍርድ ቤት እስኪታይ ድረስ እስራቱ ይታገድልኝ ብለው እንደጠየቋቸው ፕሬዝዳንቱ አቶ ደሳለኝ ጠቁመው የእግድ ውሳኔውም በጥያቄው መሰረት ተግባራዊ መሆኑን ገልጸዋል።

The president Mr. Desalegn pointed out that the minister told him that the First Instance court the third civil code court session's order was not proper and until he appeals to a higher court he asked him to obstruct the order and based on the request it was granted. 

  ተከሳሹ ለ15 ቀናት ከእስር እንዲለቀቁ ትዕዛዝ የተሰጠው ጉድያቸው በከፍተኛው ፍርድ ቤት እስኪታይና ሌላ ተለዋጭ ትዕዛዝ እስኪሰጥ ድረስ መሆኑን ፕሬዝዳንቱ አስታውቀዋል።

The president informed that the order to release the accused for 15 days was passed until his case is seen by a higher court and an optional order was passed.

የመጀመሪያ ደረጃ ፍ/ቤቱ 3ኛ የፍትሐብሔር ችሎት በአቶ ወረደወልድ ላይ የሰጠው የአንድ ወር እስራት ውሳኔ ለከፍተኛው ፍርድ ቤት በይግባኝ ቀርቦ ከተጠና በኋላ ትዕዛዙ ትክክለኛ ሆኖ ካገኘው እስራቱ ተፈጻሚ እንደሚሆን ትዕዛዙን ከሻረው ደግሞ እስራቱንና ጥፋተኛ ናቸው በሚል ፍርድ ቤቱ ያስተላለፋቸው ትዕዛዞችና ሰነዶች በሙሉ እንደሚሻሩ ፕሬዝዳንቱ አመልክተዋል።

If the order passed by the First Instance Court 3rd Civil Code Court session to arrest Mr. Werede Wolde for a month is found right after it is presented to the higher court through a appeal and being studied, the arrest would be enforced, but if it repeals all the orders and documents the court passed accusing the minister of being guilty would be repealed, the president disclosed.  

  በተከሳሹ ላይ የፌዴራሉ መጀመሪያ ደረጃ ፍርድ ቤት 3ኛ ፍትሐብሔር ችሎት ለአንድ ወር በማረፊያ ቤት እንዲቆዩ የወሰነው ፍርድ ቤቱ የሰጠውን ትዕዛዝ ባለማክበራቸውና በችሎቱም ላይ ባለመገኘታቸው መሆኑንም አቶ ደሳለኝ ተናግረዋል።

The Federal First Instance court 3rd civil code court session passed on the order on the accused to stay arrested for a month for he didn't respect the court's order and was not available in the court session, Mr. Desalegn said.

                         ከአዲስ ዘመን ግንቦት 24 ቀን 1993

                        From Addis Zemen June 1, 2001  
