

                          ጂጂ በአያሌ መገናኛ ብዙሃን ተደነቀች

                      Jiji was Praised in Several Mass Media

   አዲሱ የጂጂ አልበም ደህና ገበያ ማግኘቱ ቢቢሲ ሲያመለክት፣ የኒውዮርክ ታይምስ ጋዜጣ በበኩሉ አልበሙ የሚገባውን ያህል አለመሸጡን በመጣው ኒውስ የጂጂን ሙዚቃ ጥሩ ዘፈኖችን ሠርተው ተገቢው ሥፍራ ካላገኙ ዘፋኞች ዝርዝር ውስጥ በአንደኛነት ማስቀመጡ ታወቀ።

The new album of Jiji got good market, BBC indicated, while the New York Times newspaper on its part said that the album was not sold as it deserved and categorized it in the first place under those who did a good album but didn't get their proper place.

   በጂጂ አልበም ሄርቤ ሃንኮክን ጨምሮ በመላው አለም ገናና ስም ያላቸው የትራንፔትና የሳክስ ተጫዋች ሙዚቀኞች መካፈላቸውን የገለፀው ቢቢሲ የጂጂ ዘፈን ለአመታት በኢትዮጵያውያን ከተሰሩ ዘፈኖች ሁሉ የላቀ ነው የሚሉ አስተያየቶች መሰንዘራቸውን አመልክቷል።

BBC which disclosed that world class very popular trumpet and saxophone players including Herbe Hankok participate in Jiji's new album, and said that there were suggestions that Jiji's music excels those which have been done for years by Ethiopians.

ቢቢሲ የጂጂ አልበም ደህና ሽያጭ ማግኘቱን ጠቁሞ፤ ጂጂም በአልበሟ ሽያጭ ረክታለች ብሏል።

BBC pointed out that Jiji's album have got good sale, and said Jiji was satisfied by the sale of her album.

ኒውዮርክ ታይምስ ጋዜጣ በበኩሉ የአልበሙ ሽያጭ የዘፈኖቹን ጥሩነት የሚመጥን አለመሆኑን አመልክቷል።

The New York Times on its part said the sale of the album wasn't up to the standard of the music.

   በመላው አለም በየአመቱ ከ20 ሺህ በላይ አለበሞች እንደሚታተሙ የገለፀው ኒውዮርክ ታይመስ፤ ከብዛቱ የተነሳ አንዳንድ ጥሩ ሙዚቃዎች የሚገባቸውን ያህል ተደማጭነት ሳያገኙ ይቀራሉ ብሏል። 

The New York Times which stated that each year more than 20 thousand albums are produced, and due to its enormity, some music remained without getting as many listeners as they deserve, it said. 

የጋዜጣው የፖፕ እና የጃዝ ሙዚቃ ተንታኞች እ.ኤ.አ በ2001 ከታተሙት አልበሞች መካከል የሚገባቸውን ያህል ሽያጭ አላገኙም የሚሏቸውን ምርጥ አልበሞች የተዘረዘሩ ሲሆን ጂጂን በአንደኛ ደረጃ ጠቅሰዋል።

The paper's analysts of pop and jazz music listen the number of albums produced in 2001 who didn't get as much sale as they deserve, and mentioned Jiji under number one.

ተንታኞቹ ስለ አለበሙ በፃፉት አስተያየት የዘፈኖቹ ዜማ፤ የጂጂን ድምጽና ሙዚቃውን አካሄድ አድንቀዋል።

In the suggestions the analysts wrote about the album, they praised the tunes of the music, Jiji's voice and the musical rhythm. 

   በሌላ በኩል ጂጂን የሚያደንቁ ጽሁፎች በበርካታ የአሜሪካ ጋዜጠኞችና መጽሔቶች እየወጡ ሲሆን በአሜሪካ ታዋቂነቷ እየሰፋ በመምጣቱ በመላ አገሪቱ እየተዘዋወረች ኮንስተርት በማሳየት ላይ ከመሆኗም በተጨማሪ በሚቀጥሉት ወራት በኮንሰርት ፕሮግራሞች ጊዜዋ መጣበቡ ታውቋል። 

On the other hand, many articles written by many American journalists and magazines praising Jiji are coming out, widening her popularity, and by now she's showing concert going round the entire country, hence, the coming three months are occupied by programs, it was disclosed.     

ስለ ጂጂ ታላላቅ የመገናኛ ብዙሃን ካሏቸው ውስጥ የሚከተሉት ይገኙበታል።

The following are among the mass media who wrote about Jiji.

   «በአንድ አንጀት - አርስ ምት፣ ጂጂ ዛሬ እጅግ በጣም ድንቅ ከሆኑት አዳዲስ አፍሪካዊ ዘፋኞች ልቃ ዐይን የምትገባ ዘፋኝ ሆናለች»

"With one inner feeling – ten beats, Jiji has now excelled the very marvelous great new African singers"

   አፍሮፓፕ ወርልድዋይድ
   «የዘፋኑ ግጥሞች ትርጉም ባይገባህም ስሜቱን ግን አሳምረህ ትረዳዋለህ...»
   ፐልስ

Afro Pop World wide  
"Although you don't understand the poems of the music, you can well comprehend the feeling..."
Pulse

   «ሸጋ ናት!!»
   ዘ ኸርባን ሄትወርክ
   «ጂጂ፣ አንዳንዴ ስሜትን በሚስጥራዊ ኃይል በሚሰርቅና ባር-ባር በሚያሰኝ ድምጽ፣ ሌላ ጊዜ ደግሞ ግርማ ሞገስ ባለው ጉልህ ድምጽ፣ ሁልጊዜ ግን ነፃ ሆኖ ኩልል ብሎ በሚፈሥ ድምጽ፣ ስሜትህን ጨብጣ (ሰቅዛ ይዛ) ታቆይሃለች»
   ሪትም

"She's beautiful!!"
The Herban Network

"Jiji sometimes with a voice that steals feeling in a mysterious force and in an uneasy one, at another time with a charismatic strongly audible voice, but always in a voice that flows freely crystal clear, she firmly holds (grips) your feeling."
   Rythm

   «ጂጂ ገራምና ሥልጡን ሜዞ ሶፕራኖ ድምጽ በልጃገረድ አሽኮርማሚ ድምጽና በሴት ወይዘሮ ኩሩነት መካከል በቀላሉ የሚመላለስ የውብ መሣሪያ ተምሳሌት ነው»
   ሲዲ ናው

"Jiji's pacific advanced mezzo-soprano voices easily go to and fro between a flirting girl's voice and that of a wonan's pride, a symbol of an instrument of beauty."

   CD Now 

                           ከአዲስ አድማስ ጥር 4 ቀን 1994 

                      From Addis Admas January 12, 2002    
