

                 «እርምጃው ... ትክክለኛ፣ ተገቢና ወቅታዊ ነው» ጠ/ሚ መለስ

        "The measure taken ... is Right, Proper and Timely" Prime Minister Meles

  የኢህአዴግን አስረኛ ዓመት ምክንያት በማድረግ ትናንት ታትሞ ከወጣዊ አብዮታዊ ዴሞክራሲ ልዩ ዕትም መጽሔት ጋር ጠ/ሚ መለስ ዜናዊ ባደረጉት ቃለ ምልልስ እየተወሰደ ያለው እርምጃ የአገሪቱን ሕግና ሥርዓት ተከትሎ የተወሰደ በመሆኑ ትክክለኛ፣ ተገቢና ወቅታዊ መሆኑን ገልፀዋል።

In the interview he gave to the special edition of Abiyotawi Democracy magazine which was published for the occasion of tenth anniversary of EPRDF, Prime Minister Meles Zenawi explained that since the measure which is being taken is in accordance with the law and order, it is right, proper and timely. 

  በቅርቡ የተከሰተው ክፍፍል፣ የአዲስ አበባ ዩኒቨርስቲ ተማሪዎች ተቃውሞ፣ ከዱርዬዎች ዘረፋና ረብሻ ጋር በተያያዘ የታሰሩ ሰዎችና በአቶ ክንፈ መሰዋት ሳቢያ ያጋጠሙ ተደራራቢ ችግሮች መንግስት በሰላምና መረጋጋት ነገሮችን በቁጥጥር ውስጥ ከማድረግ አኳያ ችግር አለበት ይሆን?

Does the government have some problems in maintaining peace and stability due to the recent division, opposition of Addis Ababa University students, the arrested people in relation to hooligans' looting and the death of Mr. Kinfe?

ለሚለው ጥያቄ በሰጡት ምላሽ ክስተቶቹ ተከታትለው መታየታቸው መንግሥት የአገሪቱን ሰላምና ፀጥታ ማስጠበቅ ተስኖታል ለማለት ምክንያት የሚሆኑ እንደማይመስላቸው ተናግረዋል።

In a response to this question, he said the fact that these events occurred one after the others can't be reasons for the government's inability to maintain peace and stability.  

  ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትሩ የተማሪዎቹን ጉዳይ በተመለከተም በአንድ መልኩ ተማሪዎች ሊያነሷቸው የሚችሉና የሚገቡ ጥያቄዎች እንዳሉ ጠቁመው ብዙዎችን ጥያቄዎቻቸውን የዩኒቨርስቲው አስተዳደር ሊያስተናግዳቸው የማይችሉ ነበሩ ለማለት እንደሚቸገሩ ተናግረዋል።

With regards to the students' case, the prime minister stated that on the one hand there may be questions that should be raised and are proper but he believed that it would be difficult for him to say that most to the questions couldn't have been entertained by the administration of the university.  

ሆኖም ግን የተማሪውን እንቅስቃሴ ለሌላ ተግባር መሳሪያ ለማድረግ የሞከሩበት ሁኔታ እንደነበርና ብዙሃኑ ተማሪዎች የራሳቸውን አቋም አራምደው ጥቂቶቹ ከተቃዋሚው ጋር ተሰልፈው የተቃዋሚው መሳሪያ ለመሆን የሚንቀሳቀሱ ተማሪዎችን ለይተው ጠንክረው ለመታገልና ለመቃወም የቻሉበት ሁኔታ ባለመታየቱና የመነዳት ሁኔታ በመኖሩ ችግሩን እንዳወሳሰበውና እንዳባባሰው ይታየኛል ብለዋል።

However, there was a situation where they attempted to use the students' activity for other purpose and since the majority of the students taking their stand, couldn't identify those who were used as instruments for the opposition, and since this situation was that they kind of blindly follow it made the problem complicated, this I could see he said.      

  «ከጥያቄዎቹ በስተጀርባ የነበሩ አንዳንድ ኃይሎች ጥያቄዎቹ መፍትሔ እንደሚያገኙ ሳይሆን በጥያቄዎቹ ሽፋን ግርግር በመፍጠር በወቅቱ ኢህአዴግ ይችን ግንቦት አያልፋትም፣ እየተበታተነ ነው፣ እየተፈረካከሰ ነው፣ ትንሽ እንግፋውና እንገልብጠው የሚሉ ሕልሞችና ቅዠቶች ነበሯቸው» ሲሉም ገልጸዋል።

"Some forces that were behind the students, not as seeking remedy for the queries but at the back of the questions as a camouflage to create confusion and have the dream and nightmare of pushing EPRDF, assuming it's crumbling and breaking up, and that it won't pass this May, so let's have a coup de tat," he explained.  

በዱርዬዎቹ ዙሪያ ቀደም ሲል ጠንከር ያለ እርምጃ መውሰድ አስፈላጊ ሆኖ እያለ እርምጃው በመዘግየቱ ችግሮችን ለማወሳሰብ አስተዋጽኦ አድርጓል የሚል ግምት እንዳላቸው የገለጹት አቶ መለስ ጉዳዩ ዘላቂ መፍትሔ ሊያገኝ በሚችልበት አቅጣጫ በመቀየሱ የከተማዋ ሰላምና መረጋጋት በፊት ከነበረው የተሻለ እየሆነ መጥቷል ብለዋል።

With regard to the hooligans it was necessary to take strong measure previously, but since this was delayed, he believed, it contributed for the complexity of the problems and the problem has been considered in such a way as to give it lasting solution, and hence, the peace and stability of the city has become better then before, the prime minister Meles, explained.  

  የአቶ ክንፈ ገብረመድህን ጉዳይ በተመለከተም በሰጡት አስተያየት «የክንፈ በዚህ ጊዜ መሰዋት የሚያመለክተው ሥርዓቱ ፀጥታና ሰላምን ለማስከበር አለመቻሉን ሳይሆን በአብዛኛው በመተማመን ሊወሰዱ የሚገባቸው መለስተኛ የጥንቃቄ እርምጃዎች ሳይወሰዱ በመቅረታቸው ነው ብለዋል።

Answering to the issue regarding the death of Mr. Kinfe Gebre Medhin, he said "The sacrificial death of Kinfe at this time indicates not that the regime couldn't maintain peace and security but, mostly cautionary measures that should be taken through agreement were not taken, he said.

በቀጣይም ከእያንዳንዱ ተግባር በመማር የተሻለ ሥራ የሚሰራበት ሁኔታ እንደሚፈጠርና በአጠቃላይ መንግሥት የአገሪቱን ሰላምና ፀጥታ በአስተማማኝ ደረጃ ለማስጠበቅ አቅሙና ዝግጁነት እንዳለው አስታውቀዋል።

In the future, through learning from each task a situation would be created to do a better job and, in general, the government has the capability and preparedness to assuredly keep the country's peace and stability.

  ኢህአዴግ ዘረፋውንና ረብሻውን መሰረት አድርጎ ተቃዋሚዎችን የመምታት እርምጃ እየወሰደ ነው?

Is EPRDF taking measures against oppositions based on the looting and riot?

በእነፕሮፌሰር መስፍን የተወሰዱት እርምጃዎች ጉዳዩ በጥርጣሬ እንዲታይ የማድረግ ሁኔታ አለ ስለሚባለውም ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትሩ «ዋናው ጉዳይ ተቃዋሚ ድጅርቶች ከሁሉም እያጣቀሱ መኖር አይችሉም» ሲሉ ገልጸዋል።

With regards to the measures taken against professor Mesfin and others that made the case to be looked at suspiciously the prime minister responded, "The main thing is opposition organizations cannot live by being opportunist," he said.

የአገሪቱ ሕግና ሥርዓት በአንድ ሰው በወንጀል ተግባር ላይ በሚንቀሳቀስበት ወቅት ዴሞክራሲያዊ ሥርዓትን ማስጠበቅ ማለት ወንጀለኛን መቅጣት ማስቀጣት ማለትም ጭምር በመሆኑ ወንጀለኛ ያልሆነው መብቱ በትክክል እንዲከበርለት ማድረግና ወንጀለኛ የሆነውን ደግሞ እንዲቀጣ ማድረግ እንደሚገባ አመልክተዋል።

Keeping democratic order means including punishing criminals and having them punished according to the country's law and order, and properly keeping the rights of non-criminal, while still put to justice one who's criminal, he pointed out. 

  እነዚህ ሰዎች አንዳንዶቹ «የታሰርን እንደሆነ መላው ዓለም ይንጫጫል፤ ማንም አይነካንም፣ እንደፈለግን ሕጉን ስንረግጥ ብንከርምም ጠያቂ የለንም» የሚል ስሜት የነበራቸው እንደሚመስላቸው ገልጸዋል።

Some of these people assumed and have the feeling that "if we are put behind bars, the whole world would shut, no body would touch us, and nobody asks if we are violating the law" he explained.  

  ተቃዋሚዎች ከእንግዲህ የትግል ሜዳውና የፈንጂ ወረዳውን ለይተው በትግል ሜዳ ውስጥ በሕጉና በሥነ ሥርዓቱ መሰረት እንደልባቸው እንዲሰሩ እንደሚፈልጉም ያስታወቁት ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር መለስ እርምጃው የአገሪቱን ሕግና ሥርዓት ተከትሎ የተወሰደ በመሆኑ ትክክለኛ፣ ተገቢና ወቅታዊ ነው ብለዋል።

Prime minister Meles who disclosed that oppositions from now on should identify the battle field and the zones where bombs are planted and in accord with the law and regulation they could operate as they wish, so since the measure was taken in accord with the country's law and order, it was right, proper, and timely, he said.

                         ከአዲስ ዘመን ግንቦት 17 ቀን 1993

                        From Addis Zemen May 25, 2001           
