

                               የቆሎ ተማሪ ትዝታ

                   The Memory of "Roasted-Bean" Student

  የተሜ የትዝታ ምህዋር የከተማውን ቀልብ ሣይቀር እያስደመመ እያስገረመ ጥቅልል አድርጎ ይዞ ወደ ገጠር እብስ ይላል።

The orbit of the countryside student's memory draws even that of the city ones astonishing like a bolt from the blue transporting it to the place where it belongs.

የገጠር ሕይወት ለተሜ ከምንም በላይ ነው።

The life of countryside means more than anything for the roasted-bean student.

ለመጽሐፉ ትርጓሜ ለዜማው ትምህርት ለቅኔው ሙያ እነ ዲማ ደብረወርቅ... እነአክሱም ደብረ ዓባይ... ዙር አምባ ቤተልሔም ዋድላ... እነጨጎዲ ልጅ አንብራ... ጉንጅ ዋሸራ... እነዚህ ሁሉ የተሜ መማሪያአና መመረቂያ ሥፍራዎች ናቸው፣ እነዚህ የተሜ ዩኒቨርስቲዎች የሚገኙት ደግሞ ገጠር ነው።

The translation for the book, the lesson for the church song, the skill for poetry, localities like Dima Debrework...Axum Debre Abay...Zur Amba Bethleham Wadla...Chegodi Lij Anbera...Gunj Washera...all these are the learning and graduating places for the roasted-bin student; and these universities of roasted-bean student are found in the country.  

  የቆሎ ተማሪው ትምህርቱን በሚከታተልበት ወቅት ብዙ ገጠመኞች አሉት ከነዚህም መካከል ለዛሬው ይህን አቅርበናል።

While attending his classes, the roasted-bean student had so many memories, out of which we present the following for today.  

"ተሜ" በአማርኛ ቅኔው ሁል ጊዜ ሰው ላይ እንደአሾፈ አይኖርም።

The "student" never always lines mocking at people with his Amharic poetry.  

አንድ አንዴ እሱም በተራው በመምህራኑ ይወረፋል።

Sometimes he, too in his turn, would be taunted at by his teachers.

ዋሸራ ግድም ከየኔታ ገድሉ "የፊደል አገባብ" ሲቀጽልና የዋሸራውን ቅኔ ሲዘርፍ ቆይቶ የዋድላውን ቅኔ ለመማር የመጣ ተማሪ ነው።

He is a student who came from around Washera have been learning "usage of letters" and poetry of Washera from master Gedlu to learn the poetry of Wadla.  

ባለሙያ ነበር።

He was skillful.

ታዲያ ምን ያደርጋል ክፉ የእጅ አመል አለበት።

But what good does this bring? He has a habit of theft.  

ያገኘውን ሁሉ ብድግ ነው።

He picks up whatever he gets (on his way).

"አዩኝ አላዩኝ" እያለ የስንቱን ተማሪ "አኩፋዳ" ባዶ አድርጎታል መሰልዎት?

Do you know how many students "leather grain bag" he ransacked, he might not he identified? 

የስንቱን! ጉደኛ ነው።

A lot! He's surprisingly strange.  

ቀድሞ ከነበረበት ተማሪ ቤትም "ዘርፎ" ኖሯል የመጣው።

He had "looted" from his earlier school, too.

የሚገርመው ይህን ሁሉ ጉዱን ለካ መምህሩ ሰምተዋል።

What's surprising was his had already heard about it. 

ስለዚህ በቃ።

So that's enough.

ጭራሽ ተማሪ ቤቱን በሌብነቱ ሳይበክል መሰናበት አለበት በማለት ሊቁ ያሬድ መምህሩ ወሰኑ።

His wise master Yared decided that he should leave before he infected the school.

እጁ አስመርሯቸዋላ።

Cause he was sick and fired of his theft.  

አስጠሩትና "አያ ብርሃን ! አገርህ ግባ ትምህርቱ ይበቃሃል... እንግዲህ... ይሉታል በዲፕሎማሲያዊ ቋንቋ።

He had him called and said to him "My Berhan , Go the your family, the education you got is sufficient...after all... with a diplomatic language."

  እሱም "... ይሺ ትንሽ ብቆይ ... ባይሆን የጀመርኩትን እስክጨርስና የቃል ግሥ ቅጸላውን እስክይዝ' ይላቸዋል እሳቸው ግን "የለም የለም የያዝከው... ይበቃሃል... ደሞ... ከጓደኞችህ እንደሰማሁት ዋሸራም ትዘርፍ ነበር" አሉ።

He responded, "...Ok, but let me stay for a little while...until I finish what I started and learn grammar usage, but the master said, "No, No, what you learned...suffices you...and as I heard from your friends, you used to be good at it, in Washera, too".

ይኸው እዚህም ያለውን ጨረስክ እኮ... እንግዲህ አገርህ ግባ።

Hey, you have finished all of it here...so go to your place. 

" ብለው አሰናበቱት።" 

And he had him take his departure.

እሱም ገብቶታል።

He, too, understood. 

በማግሥቱ ጨርቁን ጠቀለለ።

On the morrow he packed off.  

የዚህ ዓይነት ዓመለኛ ተማሪ የሚገኘው ግን ከስንት አንድ ነው።

But such student of bad character is rare to find.   

መቼም የቆሎ ተማሪ ዓላማ የእግዚአብሔርን ቃል በስፋት መማር ነው።

Well, the roasted-bean student's goal is to widely learn the word of God.  

አብዛኛው ተማሪ ታዲያ ለዓላማው ሙት ነውና።

And the majority of the students are dedicated to their cause.  

የየሀገሩን የቃለ እግዚአብሔር "ይትበሀል"(ፍሬሐሳብ) ለማወቅ ከአንዱ ወደ አንዱ ሲንከራተት ይኖራል።

In order to learn the gist of the word of God as it is taught in various localities, he raves from on place to another.   

እንደወጣ የሚቀረውም ታዲያ የዚያኑ ያህል ነው።

So are many who remain at where they went.  

  አንዳንዱ በተመረቀበት ሙያ ውንበር ዘርግቶ ጉባዔ አስፍቶሲኖር ሌላው ደግሞ "ዳር አገር" ተጉዞ ትዳር ይዞ የተወለደበትን ቀዬ መለስ ብሎ ሳያየው ከብሮ ወይም ደኽይቶ በሰው አገር እድሜው ያከትማል።

While some of them give service in the skill they've graduated teaching the word of God to many, others travel to "remote end of the country", got married and live there, getting rich or poor without seeing back to his birth place.  

እዚያው ተማሪ ቤት እንዳለም ቢሆን በሰው እጅ የሚበላሸው ብዙ ነው።

There are even some who through others, turns as bad as can be even while he's at school.

አዎ ይህን ያየና የዚህም ዓለም ከንቱነት የተረዳው ደግሞ ትምህርቱን ትቶ "ብን" ብሎ ይጠፋና አንዱ ገዳም ገብቶ ይዘጋል።

Yes, the one who sees this and the futility of the world leaves school "run away" and would be shattered in a monastery.  

ሌላውም ቢሆን ቤተሰቦቹ ከዛሬ ነገ ተምሮ መጥቶ "የልጃችን ዓለም አይተን" እያሉ ሲጨነቁ እሱ ግን "ዓለም ለምኔ" ይልና ቆቡን ጭኖ መንኩሶ ድንገት ከች ይላል።

While for others their parents expect to "see them reach some place and be somebody" they, contrary to their expectation, would suddenly come home turned monk, having his cap on his head. 

የአንዳንዱ ደግሞ አንጀት ይበላል።

Some of the cases are heart-breaking.

ያሳዝናል።

It's depressing.  

በክፉ ደዌ ይለከፍና ወይም በተስቦ በሽታ ይታመምና ሲማቅቅ ከርሞ በሰው አገር "ክልትው" ብሎ እንደወጣ ይቀራል።

He'd be caught by a certain kind of illness or suffer from contagious disease, and "perish" in a foreign land.

"እማር" ብሎ ወጥቶ አገር ጥሎ ሔዶ በሚማርባት ትንሽ ጎጆ ውስጥ በእሳት ቃጠሎ ሞቶ የልጇን መርዶ ከብዙ ዓመት በኋላ የሰማችው እናት የፀፀት እንባዋን እያፈሰሰች፦ "ይማርልኝ ብዬ ዋሸራ ሰድጄ ትምህርት ገባው አሉ እሳት ሆነልጄ" ያለችውም ስለዚህ ነው።

The mother who heard here son's death after a number of years in a fire accident while he was in his class, yelled in regret "I sent him to Washera to have him learned I heard he became sharp and fired" expressing metaphorically.  

  ወደ ትውልድ ሀገሩ እንዳይላክ ደግሞ ከስንት አንድ ነው እንጂ አብዛኛው ተማሪ እንኳን በደህናው በሕመሙም ጊዜ ቢሆን እንደባህል አድርጎት የትውልድ ሀገሩንና ስሙን ቢሞት አይናገርም።

Except very few, it is customary for the majority of students not to tell where they came from and their names, in good times, let alone when they're ill.  

ሀገሩ እያለ ስሙ "ቢያዝን ደስታው አዝመራው ... የነበረው፦ ተማሪ ቤት ሲገባ "ዕዝራ ሱትኤል ኤልያስ... " ብሎ ስሙን ይለውጣል።

While his name at home was "Biyazin Destaw Azmeraw ...charges his name to "Ezra Sutel Elias ..." when he is enrolled in school.

ይብስ ብሎ ደግሞ ተሜ ተንኮሉ የስሙን አጠራር አስቸጋሪ ለማድረግ አንዳንዴ "ስምህ ማነው?"

Worst of all, the mischievous student makes his name complicated when one ask him "what's your name?" 

ሲሉት "ቴልጌል ቴልፌልሶር" ይላል።

He'd say "Telgel Telfelsor".

ይህን ረጅም ስም ለመጥራት ታዲያ በተለይ የዋሁ የገጠርአርሶአደር ሲቸገር ሲያይ ተሜ ተንኮለኛው ከት ብሎ ይስቃል።

When they mischievous student sees especially the innocent country side peasant found it difficult to pronounce the name, would laugh uproariously.  

ተሜ እኮ ምን ቢስቅ ምን ቢሣለቅ ውስጡ ግን ከእሬት የመረረ ብሶት አለው።

Even though the student laughed at times with certain occasions, deep down his heat he has sour grievance.  

አንድ አንዴ ረሀቡ በጣም ሲፀናበት ወይንም ርቦት ለልመና ከቆመበት ውሻ ሲያሳድደው የተሟላ ቤቱ ጀግና ገበሬ አባቱ የምታዝንለት እህቱና ስለ እሱ አስር አስሬ ደረቷን የምትደቃው አዛኝ እናቱ ትዝ ይሉታል ያኔ ቁጭ ብሎ እየትከዘ፦ "እናቴ ባየሻ እህቴ ባየሻ ለቁራሽ እንጀራ ሲያሳድደኝ ውሻ።

When he sometimes had nothing to eat, or a dog chased him from the house he stopped by to beg for food, he desperately longs for his home which is full of everything; his heroic father, his sympathetic sister and his mother who often cries her heart out for him it is then that he sits down lost in thought, "I wish my mother saw, I wish my sister saw when a dog chased me for a slice of breads".  

እያለ እንባውን በማፍሰስ ያንጎራጉራል።

Humming away to him in tears.  

የሚገርመው ግን ቁራሽ እንጀራ ለመለመን ሲሔድ አንድ አንዴ አስቂኝ ነገሮችን ተሜ ሲፈጽም እናየዋለን።

Yet, when this student sometimes wants to beg for a slice of bread, we saw him doing funny things.  

ምናልባት በችግር ጊዜ ሣቅን በችግር ለውጦ መከራን በዘዴ የማሳለፍ ጥበብን እያስተማረ ይሆን?

Was he teaching wisdom of switching a time of difficulty to laughter and systematically pass it?

ማን ያውቃል?

Who knows?   

... እስቲ ለሁሉም የተሜን ሌላ ተውኔት እናክልልዎ በገጠሩ "ዙረህ ና" ማለት ትንሽ ቆይተህ ተመለስ።

... Let's add for you another theater, in the country side, "come, and going round" means return after short time.  

ወይንም በኋላ ና ማለት ነው።

Or come later.

ልክ እኛ "ትንሽ ዞር ዞር ብለህ ና እንደምንለው።"

Just as we say "Go around and come".

ተሜ ታዲያ አንድ ቀን ልመና ይሔዳል የደረሰውም ገና ምጣድ እንደተጣደ ምጣዱ ሳይሰማ ነበር።

One day the student went out begging, and he reached just as the griddle, disc of day in which bread is made was put on the fire, and the disc was not heated enough.  

በበሩ ፊት ለፊት በመቆም ለመነ።

He begged, standing in front of the door.

ሴትየዋም ቀና ብላ እያየችው "ተሜ ገና እኮ ምጣዱ አልሰማ" ብትለው።

The woman looking at him said, "Hey, student, the disc hasn't yet heated" she said to him.

ተሜም "መቼም እርስዎ ይሰማሉ ብዬ ነው" ይላታል።

The student responded "But you're heated and you can listen to my question.

እርሷም አማርኛ አዋቂ ኖራ ተንኮለኛነቱን ስለተረዳች ከመጨቃጨቅ በማለት "እሺ ተሜ ባይሆን አንድ ሁለት እንጀራ እስካወጣ... ዙረህ ና" ትለዋለች።

The woman, who was wise in the language, and understood his mischievous ness, responded shortly by saying "OK, student, until I bake one or two bread go around and come".

  ተሜ ግን ወደ ሌላ አልሔደም ብቻ ፊቱን ወደውጭ ያደርግና ጀርባውን ወደ ቤት አዙሮ የኋሊት ቤቱ ውስጥ ዘው ይላል።

The student didn't go any where, but he turned around his face and entered the house facing his back.   

ለካስ ባልየው ቤት ውስጥ ኖሯል።

He didn't realize the presence of her husband.  

"ምንድነው አንተ" ብሎ ያፈጥበታል።

"What do you want?" shouted the husband at him. 

ተሜም "እሜቴ ዙረህ ና ብለውኝ ዞሬ እየገባሁኝ ነው።"

"Your princess told me to turned round and enter." 

ይለዋል።

The student replied.

ሆኖም የተሜ ቀልድ ያንዕለት አልያዘለትም።

But the student's humor didn't work out that day.

የሚስቅ የዋህ ገበሬ አላጋጠመውም።

He didn't meet an innocent laughing farmer.  

መዘዝ መጣ።

A trouble has come.  

ገበሬው ተሜን ሙልጭ ኣድርጎ ገርፎ ይለቀዋል።

The farmer hit the student severely.      

አንድ ቀን ታዲያ ቅልጥ ባለ ሰርግ ላይ ያገበሬና ተሜ በድንገት ይገናኛሉ።

One day this farmer and the student suddenly met in a big wedding.  

ተሜ ቂሙን አልረሣም።

The student harbored the grudge against him.  

ገበሬው ግን መቼ ተሜን ከቁም ነገር ቆጠረው።

But the farmer didn't take the student in to account.  

ረስቶታል።

He forgot it.    

ተሜ ደግሞ ይበልጥ ያናደደው ይኼ ነው።

What angered the student most was this.  

መናቁ።

His belittling him.  

ሌላው ቢቀር።

Leave alone the others.  

... የጠላት ያህል እንኳን አለመታየቱ... እየተበላ እየተጠጣ ወደማታ ሁሉም "ሞቅ" አለው።

The student was not even considered an enemy...the feast of dining and wining went on at about evening, all become drunk,

ጭፈራና ሽለላ ተጀመረ።

Dancing and war chant had started.

አንዱ ሲቀመጥ ሌላው ይነሳል።

When one took his seat the other stood to dance.

አንዱ ሲያቅራራ ሌላው ይሸልላል።

When one sang uproariously the other war chart.    

ሁሉም እየተነሣ ዘራፍ ይላል።

All showed his bravery by displaying patriotism through war chants.  

ሁሉም ይፎክራል።

Everybody boasts war chant to show one's patriotism.   

ታዲያ ተሜም ዛሬ መፎከር አለበት።

The student had to display patriotism today.

አሰበ።

He thought.

ቢያንስ ቢያንስ ለዚህ ገበሬ "ወንድነቱን" በፉከራ ማሳየት አለበት።

At least he had to show off his "brevity" through chants.

ግን እኮ... ገበሬው ኃይለኛ ሰው ነው።

But then ... the farmer is a strong man.

ቢተናኮሰውስ?

What if he prodded him by provoking?

ፍርሃት ፍርሃት አለው።

He was frightened.

ጭንቅ አለው።

He was worried.

ተሜ "ኤዲያ የመጣው ይምጣ" ብሎ ደጋግሞ ከጠላው ፉት ሲል እየሞቀው መጣ።

When the student repeatedly said to himself "whatever comes" and sipped the local beer, he became drunk.  

ወዲያውም በፍርሃት የተሞላች ትንሽ ልቡ በንዴትና በቁጭት ጋየች ነሸጠው ተሜ።

His small heart which was filled with fear suddenly enflamed with anger and regret, the student.  

ድንገት... "ዘራፍ የመምህር አሽከር" አለና ልክ እንደቅኔው ዘርፋ እመር ብሎ ተነሣ።

All of a sudden... , he said "I the hero, servent of the master," and stood up.   

ሰው ሁሉ ወክ ብሎ ያደመጠው ጀመር።

People started listening to him attentively.   

ብትሩን ይዞ ደበሎውን እያንጓጓ ከሰው መሐል ገብቶ

Touching his upper garment made of tanned sheep skin with his stick he went to the crowds and got in the midst of them, starting his war chant. 

    "ዘራፍ" አለ ተሜ

    "I the hero" said the student.

    "ዘራፍ እኔ ተማሪ ዘራፍ ዘራፍ አካኪ ዘራፍ

    "Hurray! I the student, and hero, yes, a hero

    የቅኔው ብትር የድጓው ጅራፍ

    Whose armor the poem, his whip the hymn book? 

    ደጀ ሰላም ዋሻው

    The gateway of the church, his den

    አኩፋዳ ጋሻው ዳዊት እንግቱ

    The leather bag, his shield, the book of psalms its necklace 

    ጸሎት ጥይቱ

    Prayer his bullet 

    አይሰጥም ተሜ እጁን በከንቱ

    Never surrenders in desperation 

    ካህን ሲሸበር ሕዝብ ሲንቻቻ

    When a priest is troubled, people yell

    ዘኬ ዘራፊ ብቻ ለብቻ

    Loots remain of food one and all

    የተዝካሩለት ማን ማን ነበሩ

    Who were there on the day of the memorial feast for the dead?

    እነመልካሙ እነማማሩ

    People like melkamu, Mamaru

    የመምህር አሽከር የድጓ ልብሱ

    Servant of the master who wears the hymn book

    አይሳሳም ተሜ ጥቂት ለነፍሱ።

    Never fears death, the student.  

"አለና ቁጭ አለ።"

He said, and sat down.

በቃ ወጣለት።

It's all over; he said it all and got relieved.  

እድምተኛው ግን አንዴ አወካበት።

But the audience up roared over him.  

                        ከአዲስ ዘመን ነሐሴ 21 ቀን 1989 ዓ.ም

                       From Addis Zemen August 27, 1997  
