

                       ከትምህርት ሚኒስቴር የተሰጠ መግለጫና ውሳኔ

              Statement and Decision Given from the Ministry of Education

  የአዲስ አበባ ዩኒቨርስቲ ተማሪዎች ያቀረቧቸው አስተዳደራዊ ጥያቄዎች ተገቢው ምላሽ እየተሰጣቸው መሆኑ ይታወቃል።

It's known that the administrative questions the Addis Ababa University raised are being given appropriate responses.

ጥያቄዎቹ የግቢው ጥያቄዎች ሆነው እያለ ግን በተማሪዎቹ ሰበብነት በአዲስ አበባ ከተማ ውስጥ ሕገ ወጥ እንቅስቃሴዎች እየተደረጉ ነው።

Even if the questions are questions of he campus students, illegal activities are underway in Addis Ababa City under the pretext of the question of the students.

የተማሪዎቹ ጥያቄዎች በአግባቡ እየተመለሱ ባሉበት በአሁኑ ወቅት የሰላማዊ ሕዝብ ኑሮንና የመንግሥት ሥራን ሲያስተጓጉሉ ለሽብር ለሁከትና ለዝርፊያ መነሻ ሊሆኑ የሚችሉበት አንዳችም ምክንያት የለም።

At this time when the students' questions are being properly answered, there's no reason why they could be causes for disrupting the peaceful living condition of the people and government work, violence and looting. 

  ከትናንት በስቲያ በዩኒቨርስቲው ተማሪዎች አነሳሽነት በአራት ኪሎ አካባቢ በተፈጠረው ሁከት በወቅቱ በመገናኛ ብዙሃን እንደተገለጸው ሁሉ የትምህርት ሚኒስቴር፣ የንግድ ባንክ፣ የቱሪስት ሆቴልና የሌሎችም መ/ቤቶችና ድርጅቶች ህንፃዎች ተደብድበዋል።

Due to the disturbance instigated by the university students at around Arat Kilo University campus the day before yesterday, as it was disclosed in the mass media, ministry of education, commercial Bank, Tourist Hotel and other work places and organizations were struck.  

መስታዎቶች ረግፈዋል።

Window panes were broken.

የአገር አቀፍ ፈተናዎች ድርጅት ንብረት የሆኑ ከ10 ያላነሱ መኪናዎች ተቃጥለዋል።

Not less that 10 cars which were the properties of National Examinations Organization were burned.  

ይህንን ቤንዚን በሚገኝበት ለከፍተኛ የእሳት አደጋ ይጋለጥ ነበር።

Had these been a place where petrol /gas were available, it would have been exposed to a severe damage. 

በትናትናውም ዕለት ይህ ፀረ ሕዝብ ተግባር በተባባሰ ሁኔታ ቀጥሎ በርካታ ንብረት ወድሟል።

And yesterday, too as a result of the intensification of this anti-people activity, several properties were destroyed.  

  ይህ ሁሉ ህገወጥና ሥርዓት አልባ ተግባር የተፈፀመው በአሁኑ ጊዜ አንዳንድ የፖለቲካ ድርጅቶች በነጻ መድረኮችና በሕዝብ ምርጫ ተቀባይነት ያላገኙበትን የፖለቲካ ዓላማ እውን ለማድረግ ከፍተኛ ትምህርት ተቋማትን በመድረክነት ለመጠቀም ከያዙት አካሄድ የመነጨ ነው።

All these illegal and anarchic activities were perpetrated in order for some political organizations which through free panel and peoples' votes last acceptance, to accomplish their political aim, using higher educational institutions as forums.    

  በአሁኑ ጊዜ በርካታ የከፍተኛ ተቋማት ተማሪዎች ትምህርታቸውን አጠናቀው አገራቸውን ህዝባቸውናን ቤተሰባቸውም ለመርዳት ቢፈልጉም ጥቂት የፖለቲካ ተልዕኮ ያላቸው ተማሪዎች ደግሞ ይህንን ዓላማ በማደናቀፍ ለህገወጥ አላማቸውና ለተለያዩ ወንጀሎች ሲያሰልፏቸው ይታያል።

Although many students of higher institutions at this time, completing their education want to help their countries, people and their families few students who have political missions want to impede this aim and seek to have the former parade with them in their illegal aims and various crimes.  

  ከፍተኛ ትምህርት ተቋማት የአገሪቱ የሰለጠነ የሰው ኃይል ማፍሪያ እንጂ የህገ ወጦች እና የወንጀለኞች መደበቂያና መከማቻ አለመሆናቸውን ትምህርት ሚኒስቴር ማስገንዘብ ይፈልጋል።

Ministry of Education wanted to remind that higher institutions are places where skilled work fore are produced but not hiding and gathering places for criminals. 

በመሆኑም እየተፈጠረ ያለውን ችግር ለማስተካከል የሚከተለውን ውሳኔ ማሳለፍ አስፈልጓል።

Hence, to curb the problem that is being created, it was necessary to pass the following decision.

  1. የአዲስ አበባ ዩኒቨርስቲ ከትናትን ሚያዝያ 10 ቀን 1993 ዓ.ም ጀምሮ ላልተወሰነ ጊዜ ተዘግቷል፤

  1. The Addis Ababa University is closed indefinitely as of yesterday April 18, 2001;

  2. ሌሎች ከፍተኛ ትምርህት ተቋማት ተማሪዎች የተለየ ፖለቲካ ተልዕኮ ላላቸው ወገኖች መናጆ ሳይሆኑ ከተመሳሳይ ድርጊት ተቆጥበው ትምህርታቸውን በሥርዓት እንዲከታተሉ እናስጠነቅቃለን፤

  2. We warn other higher institutions not to be blindly led by groups who have special                 political missions and be reserved and follow their education in an orderly fashion; 

  3. ወላጆችም ሁኔታውን በመገንዘብ መንግሥት የልጆቻቸውንና የህብረተሰቡን ደህንነት ለመጠበቅ በሚያደርገው ጥረት ውስጥ ተገቢውን አስተዋፅዖ እንዲያደርጉ ትምርህት ሚኒስቴር አጥብቆ ያስገነዝባል።

  3. Ministry of Education strictly reminds that parents being cognizant of the situation should           make the proper contribution in the effort government is making to keep the                       community's and their children's security.  

                               ትምህርት ሚኒስቴር

                             Ministry of Education  

                         ከአዲስ ዘመን ሚያዝያ 11 ቀን 1993

                        From Addis Zemen April 19, 2001
