

                  ኢትዮጵያ ቡናና ቅ/ጊዮርጊስ ከጥሎ ማለፉ ውድድር ተሸንፈው ወጡ

Ethiopian Coffee and Saint George were Defeated and Disqualified from the knock out Competition 

   በኢትዮጵያ ጥሎ ማለፍ ውድድር ትናንት በተደረጉ ግጥሚያዎች ብርሃንና ሰላም ኢትዮጵያ ቡናን 3ለ1፣ ትራንስ ኢትዮጵያ ቅ/ጊዮርጊስን 11ለ10 /በፍፁም ቅጣት ምት/ አሸንፈዋል።

In Ethiopian knock out games conducted yesterday Berhanena Selam defeated Ethiopian Coffee 3 to1, Trans Ethiopia defeated Saint George 11 to 10 /in a penalty shoot out/.

   አዲስ አበባ ስታድየም ላይ በተደረገው የትራንስና ቅዱስ ጊዮርጊስ ግጥሚያ ውድድሩ በተጀመረ በ18ኛው ሴከንድ ለቅ/ጊዮርጊስ ፍቃዱ በላይ ሲያስቆጥር በ21ኛው ደቂቃ ቴዎድሮስ (ቦካንዴ) ያቀበለውን ስንታየሁ ጌታቸው (ቆጬ) ከመረብ አሳርፎ ቡድኑን 2ለ0 እንዲመራ አስችሎታል። 

In a Trans Vs Saint George game conducted at Addis Ababa Stadium, Fekadu Belay scored a goal for Saint George in the 18th second while sintayehu Getachew (koche) inserted the ball into the net, which he received from Tewdros (Bokande), and made his team lead 2 to 0.

ትርንሶች በበኩላቸው እርስ በርስ በመናበብ ባካሄዱት ጨዋታ በ23ኛው ደቂቃ ላይ በጸጋዬ ግርማ የመጀመሪያውን ግብ አግብተዋል።

Trans on their part coordinating their game scored their first goal at the 23rd minute by Tsegaye Girma.  

ጨዋታው የመሸናነፍ እልህ የተቀላቀለበትና ደማቅ ነበር። 

The game was full of determination to win and colorful.

የትራንሱ ጣሰው በክንፍ በኩል ጥሩ ጥሩ ኳሶችን በማቀበል ከፍተኛ አስተዋፅአ አበርክቷል። 

Tasew of Trans contributed greatly in serving good balls from the wing.

ጨዋታው እየተሟሟቀ ሄዶ በ42ተኛው ደቂቃ የቅ/ጊዮርጊሱ ስንታየሁ ጌታቸው ለቡድኑ 3ተኛዋን ለራሱ ደግሞ 2ተኛውን ግብ ከመረብ አሳርፏል።

The game went animated and at the 42th minute Sintayehu Getachew scored the 3rd goal for his team and the 2nd for himself.

   የመጀመሪያውን ግማሽ ተበልጠው ላለመውጣት ከፍተኛ እንቅስቃሴ ሲያደርጉ የነበሩት ትራንሶች 3ተኛዋን ግብ በስንታየው ጌታቸው ከተቆጠረችባቸው በኋላ አንድ ደቂቃ ባልሞላ ጊዜ ውስጥ ተቀባብለው ወደ ግብ ክልል በመዝለቅ በ11 ቁጥሩ በኤፍሬም ዘርኡ አማካኝነት 2ተኛዋን ግብ አስቆጥረው የመጀመሪያው አርባ አምስት ተጠናቋል።

Trans who showed a lot of activities not to be excelled during the first half and after the 3rd goal was scored upon them by Sintayehu Getachew, in less than a minute's time, they passed over the ball to each other towards the goal area and scored the 2nd goal through the no-11, Ephrem Zeru, which completed the first fourty-five minutes. 

ከረፍት መልስ 3ለ2 በ73ኛው ደቂቃ የትራንሱ ብርሃነ ሶስተኛውን ግብ ከመረብ በማሳረፍ አቻ አድርጓቸዋል። 

Returning from recess with a score 3 to 2, Berhane of Trans cast the ball in to the net and made them equal.

በመቀጠል የትራሱ ኃይሌ (ቲጋና) አራተኛውን ግብ ቅ/ጊዮርጊስ መረብ ላይ በመዶሉ ትራንስ 4ለ3 በሆነ ውጤት መሪነቱን ተቀዳጀ። 

Following that Haile (Tigana) of Trans thrust the ball into the net and Transe 4 to 2 started driving in the front seat.

ቅ/ጊዮርጊስ በበኩሉ ፋሲል ተካልኝን ቀይሮ በገባው በአሸናፊ ሲሳይ አማካኝነት በ75ተኛው ደቂቃ ላይ አቻ የምታደርጋቸውን ግብ አግኝቷል።

Saint George on its part got a goal at the 75th minute that made them equal by Ashenafi Sisay who was changed by Fasil Tekalegn.  

   ለቅ/ጊዮርጊስ ስንታየሁ ጌታቸው፣ ፍቃዱ በላይና ሙሉአለም ረጋሳ ወደ ግብ ክልል በመዝለቅ ያደረጉአቸው ሙከራዎች በበረኛው ከሽፈዋል። 

For Saint George, the attempt made by Sintayehu Getachew, Fekadu Belay and Mulualem Regasa getting in to the goal area were made ineffectual by the goal keeper.

በቁጥር ከሶስት የማይበልጡ ኳሶችም በግቡ አናት ላይ በመውጣት ግብ ሳይሆኑ ቀርተዋል። 

Not more than three balls couldn't become goals for they went out on the top of the goal pole.

ትራንስ ከፍተኛ የህዝብ ድጋፍን ጭምር በማግኘቱ ከቅ/ጊዮርጊስ ጋር በጨዋታ 4ለ4 በሆነ አቻ ውጤት ተለያይቷል።

Since Trans got a lot of support from the people, too it could finish the game being 4 to 4 with Saint George.  

አሸናፊውን ለመለየት በተሰጠ የፍጹም ቅጣት ምት ትራንስ 7ለ6 በሆነ ውጤት ረቷል። 

In the penalty kick given to differentiate the winner, Trans won 7 to 6.

በመሆኑም ቅ/ጊዮርጊስ በትራንስ 11ለ10 በሆነ ውጤት ተሸንፎ ከጥሎ ማለፍ ውድድሩ ውጪ ሆኗል።

Therefore, Saint George was defeated by Trans 11 to 10 and disqualified from the knock out competition.

በሌላ ጨዋታ ብርሃንና ሰላም ያልታሰበ ድል በኢትዮጵያ ቡና ላይ ተቀዳጅቷል፦ 3ለ1።

In a different game, Berhanena Selam got an unexpected victory over Ethiopian coffee – 3 to 1.

የግብ ማግባቱን ቅድሚያ የወሰዱት ኢትዮ-ቡናዎች በሚኪኤል ዋለልኝ አማካኝነት ነበር። 

The precedence for goal was taken by Ethio-coffee through Michael Walelegne.  

ሚካኤል የቡድኑ ኮከብ ጎል አግቢ ነው። 

Michael is the team's star goal-scorer.  

ከአራት ደቂቃ በኋላ በ24ተኛው ደቂቃ ላይ አበበ ጌታቸው ለብርሀንና ሰላም አቻ የምታደርገውን የመጀመሪያ ግብ ከአስቆጠረ በኋላ የጨዋታውን ሚዛን ወደ ብርሐንና ሰላሞች አድልቷል። 

After four minutes, at the 24th minute Abebe Getachew scored the first goal that made Berhanena Selam equal, the balance of the game inclined to Berhanena Selam.

ከዚህም ግብ መቆጠር በኋላ ብርሃንና ሰላሞች በተደጋጋሚ የቡናዎችን በር ፈትሸዋል። 

After this goal was scored Berhanena Selam repeatedly checked coffee's goal.

በ48ተኛው ደቂቃ ሙሉቀን ዮሐንስ ሁለተኛውን በጥሩ ሁኔታ አስቆጥሯል። 

At the 48th minute Muluken Yohannes scored the second goal beautifully.

ሶስተኛውንና የማሸነፊያውን ጎል በ64ተኛው ደቂቃ ላይ ሄኖክ አበበ አስቆጥሮ ብርሃንና ሰላም ኢትዮጵያ ቡናን ከጥሎ ማለፍ ዋንጫ ውጪ አድርጎታል። 

The 3rd and the winning goal was scored by Henok Abebe at the 64th minute and as a result, Berhanena Selam made coffee disqualified from the knock out cup game.

ውድድሮቹ ዛሬ እና ነገ በአዲስ አበባ ስቴዲየም ቀጥለው እንደሚካሄዱ ታውቋል።

The games continue today and tomorrow at the Addis Ababa Stadium, it was disclosed.  

                          ከኢትዮ ስፖርት ጥር 27 ቀን 1994

                        From Ethio Sport February 4, 2002
