


የፊያሜታ መልዕክት!

Message of Fiameta!  

                          ሩጫችንን ጀመርን እንጂ አልጨረስንም!

                 We have not Completed, Rather just started our Race!

   ይህ ትውልድ ማስተላለፍ የሚችለው ታላቅ ቁምነገር ቢኖር የፕሬስ ነፃነትን ነው። 

A great lesson this generation can pass on to the next is the freedom of press.  

ይህን በታላቅ መስዋዕትነት የተጨበጠ የመናገርና የመፃፍ ነፃነት መልቀቅ ከቶውኑ የሚታሰብ አይደለም። 

Leaving the Freedom of speech and writing that was brought forth through great Sacrifice is certainly unthinkable.  

ይቺኑ በነፃ ጋዜጠኞች መስዋዕትነት የተገኘች መብት እስከመጨረሻ ይዞ መቆየት አስፈላጊነቱ የግድ ነው። 

Staying up to the end with this right which was found through the sacrifice of free press journalists is mandatory.  

የዚህም ትውልድ ታሪካዊ ኃላፊነት የፕሬስ ነፃነትን በትግል፣ በእስር፣ በእንግልት እና በሞት ጭምር ማቆየት ሆነና ዛሬም ከሃቅ ጋር ትንቅንቅ ተገጥሞ አለ።

Since the historical responsibility of this generation is to hold fast and sustain press freedom through struggle, imprisonment, and suffering and even through sacrifice, that's why it is now meeting face to face with truth.  

   እርግጥ ነው፣ይህ ሃቅ የማይዋጥላቸው ወገኖች ነፃውን ፕሬስና ጋዜጠኛውን ለመጉዳት የማይምሱት ጉድጓድ፣ የማይፈነቅሉት ድንጋይ የለም። 

Indeed, there are sides who couldn't admit this hard truth and wanted to hurt the free press journalist, they never leave no store unturned to harm them.  

ነፃው ጋዜጠኛ ደግሞ እነዚህን ሁሉ ጋሬጣዎች እያለፈ ዛሬ ላይ ተደርሷል። 

The free press journalist, on the other hand, having over come all these obstacles reached today.  

እንግዲህ የዚህ ትውልድ ሃብት እነዚህ ብርቅዬ የኢትዮጵያ ልጆች የሆኑት ጋዜጠኞችና ጋዜጦች ናቸው። 

Therefore, the wealth of this generation is these journalists and newspapers who are unique children of Ethiopia. 

ይህ ትውልድ በትግል ያነፀውን የመፃፍ ነፃነት ለሚቀጥለው ትውልድ በድል ማስረከብ ይኖርበታል። 

The freedom of writing that this generation cleanses through struggle has to pall on victoriously to the next generation.  

ለዚህ ደግሞ ሩጫው ተጀመረ እንጂ አልተገባደደም። 

And for these we have not completed, rather just started the race.  

ጋዜጠኞች በፖለቲካ ውሽንፍር እየተመቱ ወደ ዳር እንዳይወጡ የሞት ሽረት ትግል ማድረግም ዛሬና ዛሬውኑ የሚጠበቅ የትውልድ አደራ ነው።

In order to save journalists form being beaten and thrown by the political storm, it's the responsibility of the generation to do its level best today and only to day by hook or by crook.  

እንግዲህ ሁሉም የድርሻውን ይወጣ። 

Let everyone does his own share.  

ነፃ ጋዜጠኞችን ያሳፈረችው መርከብ በወጀብ እና በውሽንፍር መሃል ጉዞዋን ቀጥላለች። 

The ship that aboard free press journalists continues her journey in the midst of cloudburst and blizzard.  

ይህ ታሪካዊ ጉዞ ተጠናቆ በሌላ ዘመን፣ በሌላ ጊዜ መልህቋን በሰላማዊ ምድር ላይ ስትጥል ማየት ናፍቆታችን ነው።

Our wish is to see this historic journey completed, and in another age, in another time putting her anchor peacefully on to the land.  

ይህም ትውልድ የገባበትን ታሪካዊ ግዴታ ተገንዝቦ እስከመጨረሻው የድል ምዕራፍ ይሸጋገራል የሚል ፅኑ እምነት አለን።

We have strong belief that this generation would pall on up to the last victorious chapter, being aware of its historic duty.  

                           ከፊያሜታ ሚያዝያ 21 ቀን 1990

                           From Fiameta April 29, 1998        
