

                           የአሳፋሪው ትርዒት መጋረጃ ተገለጠ!

                The Curtain of the Embarrassing scene is Uncovered!

   በዶ/ር ታዬ ላይ በሃሰት መስክሩ የተባሉ እስረኞች ቃላቸውን ለፍ/ቤት ባለፈው ታህሳስ 3 ቀን 1990 ዓ.ም የነዶ/ር ታዬ፣ አቶ ገ/ፃዲቅ ኃ/ማርያምና አቶ ከበደ ደስታን ጉዳይ ለመመልከት ዳኞች ችሎት ላይ ባለመቅረባቸው ለጥር 13 ቀን ተቀጥሮ መመለሳቸው ይታወሳል። 

Prisoners who were about to testify against Dr. Taye on December 11, 1998 returned, receiving an appointment for January 21 as Judges who were to see Dr. Taye, Mr. Gebretsadik Hailemariam and Mr. Kebede Desta's case didn't appear at the tribunal.  

ረቡዕ ጥር 13 1990 ዓ.ም እነ ዶ/ር ታዬ ከማረሚያ ቤት በ3፡00 ሰዓት መጡ። 

On January 21, 1998 Dr. Taye and the rest came from correction House at 9:00.

ዳኞችም በ4፡20 ተሰየሙ። 

The judges appeared before the court session at 10:20.  

በዕለቱ የእምነት ክህደት ቃሉን እንዲሰጥ የቀረበው ሻምበል ሞገስ አሰፋ የደረሰበትን አሰቃቂ ድብደባና ግርፋት ለእስር ቤቱ ገልጿል።

That day the individual, who appeared to testify, Major Moges Assefa told the court the severe beating and whipping he underwent. 

   ሻምበል ሞገስ አሰፋ ቃሉን ለፍ/ቤት ሲሰጥ እንደ ዶ/ር ታዬ ወ/ሰማያት አቶ ገ/ፃዲቅ ኃ/ማርያምና አቶ ከበደ ደስታ ህገ ወጥ የፖለቲካ ድርጅት እንደሚያንቀሳቅሱና መንግሥትን በኃይል ለመገልበጥ እንዳሴሩ የምታውቀው ጉዳይ አለህ በሚል ሰበብ እጄ ከተያዘበት ቀን ጀምሮ በቃላት መግለፅ በማይቻል ሁኔታ እየተሰቃየሁኝ ነኝ ብሏል።

Major Moges Assefa while giving his words to the court, told the unexplainable suffering he was undergoing for they claimed he knew that Dr. Taye Woldesemayat, Mr. Gebretasadik Haile Mariam and Mr. Kebede Desta run illegal political organization that plot to forcefully oust the government.  

   ይኸውም የስቃዬ መጠን ሰፋ ያለ ቢሆንም የቀድሞ ሰራዊት አባል እንደነበርና የተሀድሶ ፕሮግራሙን አጠናቆ የግል ህይወቱን ለመምራት በእርሽ ስራ እንደተሰማራና ለእርሻ ስራው ተስማሚ ምርጥ ዘር ለመግዛት አዲስ አበባ መጥቶ ያለምንም ምክንያት በሲቪል ታጣቂዎች ከመንገድ ላይ ታፍኖ በአንድ ጨለማ ክፍል ውስጥ መወርወሩንና በድብደባ ብዛት አንድ ጥርሱ እንደወለቀ አስረድቷል።

That his suffering was immense, and that he used to be a member of ex-army and completed his rehab program and has been working in a farmland, and civilians kidnapped him without any reason and was thrown to a dark room an as a result of harsh beating his tooth was pulled out.  

   በመቀጠልም እነዚሁ ገራፊዎች የፊጥኝ አስረውት የዝቅዝቅ ሰቅለው በመደብደብ እና በኤሌትሪክ ንዝረት እንዳሰቃዩት ሲናገር በነዶ/ር ታዬ ላይ መስክር ነፃ ትወጣለህ እያሉ ያሰቃዩት እንደነበር ለፍ/ቤቱ አልሸሸገም። 

Then this wiper tied him with a rope, turned him upside down and beat him, underwent the suffering of electric shock; they told him to testify against Dr. Taye and if he does so, they told him that he would be free, this he didn't wide if form the court.  

በተጨማሪም በመጀመሪያው እለት ሲያዝ አዲስ ሲትዝን ሰዓት 440.0 ብር የተገዛ እና ሁለት ጣሳ እያንዳንዱ በ220.0 ብር የተገዛ ሁለት ጣሳ የሽንኩርት ምርጥ ዘርና በኪስ የነበረ ጥሬ ገንዘብ እንደተወሰደበት ተናግሯል።

In addition, he told that when he was first caught a citizen wrist watch which was bought for 440 Birr and two cans of onion best seed which was bought for 220 Birr and cash which was in his pocket was taken from him.  

   ይህ ሁሉ ተራ ውንብድና እና ዝርፊያ የተካሄደበት ያለምንም ማስረጃ በግድ እነሱ ባቀናበሩት ተውኔት ላይ እንዲተውን ለመገፋፋት እና ለኢትዮጵያ ህዝብ የተሳሳተ ኢንፎርሜሽን አቅርብ በማለት ሲያስገድዱት እንደነበር ሲያብራራ ይሄ እኛ የምንልህን በትክክል አምነህ ከፈፀምክ በነፃ እንለቅሃለን። 

All these brigandage and robbery was conducted so as to forcefully make him act in the drama they perpetrated and oblige him to present false information to the Ethiopian people, and they told him if he does so, they will release him freely.  

ከኢትዮጵያ ቴሌቪዥን ጋዜጠኞች መጥተው እነ ዶ/ር ታዬ የመአህድ ፓለቲካ ድርጅት ህገ ወጥ መሪዎች መሆናቸው ከገለፅክና ለህዝቡ ትምህርት ትሰጣለህ በማለት ሊያግባቡኝ ቢሞክሩም እናም በነፃ ህሊናዬ የኢትዮጵያን ህዝብ ወደ ተሳሳተ ጐዳና ለማምራት ስላልፈለኩ ፈቃደኛ አልሆንኩም ብሏል።

If you express that Dr. Taye and the other are illegal leaders of AAPO political organization in front of a television camera and teach the public, in which case I didn't want to mislead the Ethiopian people so I was not willing.  

   ከዚህ በተጨማሪም ከዚህ ቀደም በቴሌቪዥንና በሬዲዮ በነ ዶ/ር ታዬ ላይ የመሰከረው ዮሴፍ ቢረሳው የተባለውን ወጣት በእስር ቤት አብረው እንደነበሩና በድብደባ ከፍተኛ ስቃይ ደርሶበት በቅርቡ በቴሌቪዥን በነዶ/ር ታዬ ላይ እንድመሰክር የሚጠና ፅሁፍ ተሰጥቶኝ እያነበብኩ ነው በማለት የገለፀላቸው መሆኑን ተናግረዋል።

In addition, he told that he met the young boy Yoseph Biresaw who testified on the radio and television in the prison, and Yoseph had severely been beaten and told him that he was given a script to study against Dr. Taye and the rest, which is going to be acted on the TV.   

   በመጨረሻም በአካሌ ላይ የደረሰብኝን ጉዳት ፍ/ቤቱ እንዲመለከትልኝ ብሎ የጠየቀ ሲሆን ፍ/ቤቱም አሁን ማሳየቱ ጥቅም የለውም። 

At last, he asked the court to show the serious bodily harm, but the court said "it doesn't have any use to show this now." 

ነገር ግን በሚቀጥለው ጊዜ የእጁን ስብራትና ግርፋቱን የጥርሱንም ውልቃት እንዲያቀርብ በማለት ለየካቲት 27 ቀን ቀጠሮ ተሰጥቷል።

But next time he was given an appointment for March 5 to show and his broken tooth, too; his broken arm and whipping 

   የሻምበል ሞገስ አሰፋ ቤተሰቦችም ይህ ሪፓርት እስቀረበበት ዕለት ድረስ ግለሰቡ የትና በምን ሁኔታ ላይ እንደሚገኝ አያውቁም።

Until this report is presented, Major Moges' family had no idea where the individual is and in what kind of situation he's found.  

                            ከፊያሜታ ጥር 20 ቀን 1990

                          From Fiameta January 28, 1998
