

ዜና የኤርትራው ሰላይ በኢትዮጵያ ኤምባሲው ተዳረ

The Spy got married in Ethiopian Embassy.

   "የአምባሳደሩ ሚስት ኤርትራዊ ስለሆኑ ይሆን?" ኤርትራ ውስጥ ተወልዶ ያደገውና በሰላይነት ሙያ ከተሰማሩት መሃል አንዱ እንደሆነ የሚነገርለት አቶ ታደሰ ገ/እግዚአብሔር ቦን ውስጥ በሚገኘው የኢትዮጵያ ኤምባሲ ነሐሴ 23 ቀን 1991 ዓ.ም ከፍተኛ የሆነ ሰርግ ማድረጉ ታወቀ።

"Was it because the Ambassador's wife is Eritrean?" Mr. Tadesse Gebre Egziabhere who was born and grew up in Eritrea, was told by many, as one of those engaged in spying career, threw a lavish wedding on September 1, 1999 in the premise of  Ethiopian Embassy in Bon, it is disclosed.

   አቶ ታደሰ ከኤርትራ ለትምህርት ወደ ጀርመን ከሄደ በኋላ በዚያው በስደት የቀረ ግለሰብ ሲሆን፣ በኢትዮጵያ አንድነት ጉዳይ በጀርመን ስብሰባ ሲደረግ፣ በተለይም ስለሻዕቢያና ወያኔ ሲነሳ በስድብና በጩኸት አዳራሹን የሚበጠብጥ እንደነበር ተያይዞ የደረሰን ዘገባ ያስረዳል። 

The report that reached us explained that Mr. Tadesse was sent to Germany for education and he remained there, when meeting was held in Germany about issue of Ethiopian Unity, he was known for insulting and shouting in the hall, especially when EPLF and TPLF were mentioned.  

በጣም አስገራሚውም ነገር በሻዕቢያ አቀንቃኝነቱ የሚታወቀው ይኸው ግለሰብ በኢትዮጵያ ኤምባሲ በአምባሳደሩ መኖሪያ ቤት ድል ያለ ድግስ አድርጐ መውጣቱ ነው፣ ተብሏል።

What was most astounding about this individual was the fact that he had a wedding extravaganza in the premise of the residence of the Ethiopian ambassador, it was said.

   እነዚሁ ምንጮች ጨምረው እንደገለፁት ግለሰቦቹ ይህን ያደረጉት በሌሎች ኢትዮጵያዊያን ላይ ያላቸውን ንቀት ለማሳየት ነው፣ የሚሉ ወገኖች አሉ። 

These sources added that the individuals did this in order to show their contempt on other Ethiopians as some said.  

ኤምባሲው አገሪቱንና ሕዝቡን ሲወክል የአምባሳደሩም መኖሪያ ቤት እንደ ቤተ መንግሥት የሚቆጠር ነው። 

While the Embassy represents the people, the Ambassador's residence is considered as a palace.  

ሆኖም ድግስ ተደግሶ መፈንጨት ምን ከሚሉት ፖሊሲ የመነጨ ነው? የሚሉ ወገኖች አስተያየታቸውን ከስፍሪው በስልክ ገልፀውልናል።

However, from which policy does this kind of irresponsible act of throwing a party emanates? Say some people on telephone form the place.  

   ሌላው አነጋጋሪ ጉዳይ ደግሞ የኢትዮጵያው አምባሳደር የአቶ ብርሃኑ ትንሳይ ባለቤት ኤርትራዊ ናቸው መባሉ ነው። 

The other contentious issue was the Ethiopian Ambassador Mr. Berhanu Tinsay's wife is Eritrean.  

ይህ ሰርግና ምላሽ የተፈፀመው የኢትዮጵያው አምባሳደር ሚስት ኤርትራዊ ስለሆነች ነው የሚሉ አስተያየቶችም ተሰንዝረዋል። 

Opinions were given that this lavish wedding party was thrown because the wife of the Ethiopian Ambassador is Eritrean.  

ሌላው ደግሞ በቦን የሚገኘው የኢትዮጵያ ኤምባሲ ዋና ፀሐፊ እንደ ታደሰ ገ/እግዚአብሔር ከኤርትራ የመጣ መሆኑ ሰርጉን ለማድመቅ ጠቀሜታ እንደሰጠው ታዛቢዎች ገልፀዋል። 

Tadesse Gebre Egziabeher secretary at Ethiopian Embassy in Bon who came from Eritrean made the wedding extravaganza colorful, observers commented.  

ዋና ፀሐፊው አቶ ፀሃዬ ወልደ ገብርኤል በጀርመን አገር ስደተኛ በነበረበት ወቅት የሻዕቢያ ተከታይ በመሆን አስተዋፅኦ ማድረጉን ውስጥ አዋቂ ምንጮቹ ገልፀውልናል። 

Internal sources told us that the General Secretary, Mr. Tsehaye Wolde Gabriel contributed a lot being EPLE member when he was an immigrant in Germany.  

ከሁሉም የሚያሳዝነው ደግሞ ኤምባሲው ሁለትጊዜ ኢትዮጵያዊ ስደተኞችን አሁን በኢትዮጵያና ኤርትራ መካከል ስለደረሰው ጥፋት ለመወያየት ሲጋበዝ በኤምባሲው ውስጥ ስብሰባ እንዳይደረግ ማድረጉ ታውቋል።

It was regrettable that while the Embassy invited Ethiopian immigrants twice to discuss about the prevalent situations in Eritrea and Ethiopia, the meeting was not held in the Embassy compound.  

በኢትዮጵያ ኤምባሲ ውስጥ ስብሰባ እንዳይደረግ የተወሰነባቸውም ተቃዋሚዎች ኤምባሴያችንን አይረግጡም በሚል መንፈስ መሆኑ ተያይዞ ተዘግቧል። 

The reason given for deciding not to hold the meeting within the Embassy premise was to make oppositions not appear in the embassy, it was disclosed.  

በዚህም ምክንያት ከኤርትራ ለተፈናቀሉት ወገኖች የእርዳታ ማሰባሰብ ለማድረግ ከኤምባሲው ውጪ አዳራሽ ተከራይተው ስብሰባው ተጠናቋል። 

Due to this reason, they rented a hall outside the embassy and in the meeting held there, it was agreed to raise fund for the displaced Ethiopians and the meeting was adjourned.  

ከኤምባሲው ውጪ አዳራሽ ለመከራየትም 28 ሺህ ብር ወጪ ተደርጓል። 

To rent a hall outside the embassy 28 thousand Birr was expended.  

ታዲያ በኤምባሲው ስለኢትዮጵያ ጉዳይ ለመነጋገር አሻፈረኝ ያሉት ዲፕሎማቶች የኤርትራ ሰላይ ነው ለሚባለው
ግለሰብ መፍቀዳቸው ምን ይባላል? ኤርትራዊውስ በዚህ ሰርግና ምላሽ ምን ሰልሏል እነማንን መልምሏል? ምላሹን ለመንግሥት አካላት እንተወዋለን።

So, why do the diplomats who refused to discuss issues about Ethiopia in the premise of the Embassy allowed the premise for an individual who's claimed to be a spy for Eritrea? What did the Eritrean spied in this wedding? Who did he recruit? We'll leave the response to government bodies.  

ከፊያሜታ ጳጉሜን 1 ቀን 1990

From Fiameta September 6, 1998
