

             ኤርትራዊያን የካቶሊክ ቄሶች በቅዱስ ዮሴፍ ት/ቤት ችግር እየፈጠሩ ነው፣ ተባለ

         Eritrean Catholic Priests were said to Create Problems in Saint Joseph School

   በቅዱስ ዮሴፍ የወንዶች ት/ቤት ሁለት ኤርትራዊ መምህራን በተማሪዎች ላይ በደል እያደረሱ ነው፣ ሲሉ ችግሩ ያጋጠማቸው ግለሰቦች ለዝግጅት ክፍላችን ገለጡ። 

Two Eritrean teachers in Saint Joseph boys' school are doing harm students reported victims to our office.  

እነዚህ ኤርትራዊያን በተማሪዎች ላይ አያደረጉ ያለውን በደል በማፋጠን እስከመጨረሻው ደቂቃ ድረስ እየተበቀሉን ናቸው፣ ብለዋል።

These Eritreans are speeding their acts which are done in the spirit of revenge, they said. 

   የት/ቤቱ ዲሬክተር ብራዘር ጳውሎስ ወ/አረገይ እና በእጓለ ማውታ አብሮ የተማረው ብራዘር ወልዱ ኃይሉ በኤርትራዊነታቸው ሲመኩ የቆዩ መሆናቸውን ገልፀው በሁለቱ አገሮች መካከል ግጭት ከተፈጠረ በኋላ በተማሪዎች አስተማሪዎች ላይ ጫና እየፈጠሩ መሆናቸውን ገልፀዋል። 

The director of the school brother Paulos wolde Aregay and Brother Woldu Hailu, who went together to the religious teaching institution, expressed that they have been proud of their being Eritrean, and after the clash between the two countries surfaced, they have started putting pressures on students and teachers, they disclosed.  

ከዚህም መሃል በዚሁ ዓመት የ12ኛ ክፍል መልቀቂያ ፈተና ተፈታኞችን የዲሲፕሊን ጉድለት በሚል ሰበብ አንድ ሳምንት ሲቀራቸው እንዲሰናበቱ ወስነውባቸዋል።

One of these was that they sent out students, who were taking school leaving examinations this year, just a week before their examination in an excuse of disciplinary case.  

   እነዚህ ሁለት ኤርትራዊያን ስለሚፈፅሙት በደል በተጨማሪ ሲገልፁ የቅዱስ ዮሴፍ መምህራንም ምንም መብት የላቸውም፣ ብለዋል። 

While explaining about the harms these two Eritreans did to them, they said that the Saint Joseph teachers have no rights.  

እነዚህ መምህራን እንዲሰበሰቡ አይፈቅድላቸውም፣ በትርፍ ጊዜያቸው እንኳን እንዳይገናኙ እያንዳንዱ አስተማሪ በሚያስተምርበት ክፍል ውስጥ እንዲቆይ ይገደዳል። 

These teachers are not allowed to gather and conduct meetings; even during their free period time, they were not permitted to meet one another, for each teacher would be obliged to stay in the class where he happens to be.  

ተማሪዎችንም ለማባረር ቢሆን ኤርትራዊያኑ በተማሪዎች ላይ የጻፉትን ደብዳቤ ለመምህራኑ በግዴታ በማስፈረም እርምጃ እንደሚወስዱባቸው ይገልጻሉ።

Even when they want to dismiss students, they write letters on the students and have them signed by teachers of as to take measures, they disclosed.  

   ከሁለቱ ኤርትራዊያን በተለይ ብራዘር ወልዱ ኃይሉ ተማሪዎችን በሰበብ አስባቡ በመክሰስ በማስከሰስ ብሎም ወላጅ እንዲያመጡ ካደረገ በኋላ ወላጆቻቸውን ከፍና ዝቅ አድርጐ በመሳደብ ከመምህር የማይጠበቅ ተግባር በመፈፀም ላይ እንደሚገኝ ገልፀዋል።

Particularly brother woldu Hailu, accuses students himself or having them accused with no apparent reason, and made a call to their parents deeply insulting them, doing something which is not expected from a teacher, they added.  

   ይኸውም ት/ቤት የወለጆች ኰሚቴ የሌለውና ት/ሚንስቴር ቁጥጥር እንደማያደርግበት የገለፁት ምንጮች ይህ ድርጊት ግን እስከመቼ ይቀጥላል? 

The source also disclosed that the school doesn't have Parents' committee and the Ministry of Education doesn't take any control on the school, wondering how long would this continue?     

መንግሥትስ ምነው ዝም አለ? 

Why has the government kept silent?    

አስተያየታቸውን ሰጥተዋል።

They concluded their suggestions.  

                            ከፊያሜታ ነሐሴ 24 ቀን 1990

                           From Fiameta August 30, 1998
