

                        መምህሩ በፖለቲካ ስም ከሥራና ደመወዝ ታገዱ!

      The Teacher was Suspended from Work and Salary Under the Pretext of Politics  

   የጐላ ቅዱስ ሚካኤል ቤተ ክርስቲያን የመፅሐፍ መምህር የሆኑት መምህር ጥበቡ አያሌው ፖለቲካ ተናግረዋል በሚል ሰበብ ከሥራና ደመወዝ መታገዳቸው ተገለፀ።

The Teacher of the book at Gola St. Michael Church Tibebu Ayalew, was suspended from work and salary, it was reported. 

   አሳፋሪና ቅሌት አዘል የሆኑ ነገሮች አልፎ አልፎ በአንዳንድ የቤተ ክርስቲያን ኃላፊዎች አካባቢ ብቅ፣ ብቅ፣ ማለታቸው አልቀረም። 

Shameful and scandalous things are occasionally exhibited around church leaders.  

የመምህር ጥበቡ አያሌው ከሥራና ደመወዝ የመታገዳቸው ጉዳይም በዚህ ዙሪያ ያተኰረ መሆኑን ውስጥ አዋቂዎች እየተናገሩ ነው። 

The cause of Teacher Tibebu Ayalew's suspense from job and salary revolves around this issue, internal sources are saying. 

በአጋጅና ታጋጅ መካከል አለመግባባት ከተፈጠረ ወራቶች ተቆጥረው እንደነበር የመፅሐፍ መምህሩ ከመታገዳቸው በፊት የገጠማቸው የውጣ ውረድ ዘገባ እንደሚያመለክተው፣ ከስንት ያለመግባባት ጉዞ በኋላ በፖለቲካ ሽፋን ከሥራና ደመወዝ እንደታገዱ የደረሰን ዝርዝር ዘገባ ይገልፃል።

It has been months since the disagreement between the body who enacted the suspension and the suspended individual was exposed; the report that indicated the ups and downs the teacher underwent even before the suspension suggested that after a long and series of misunderstandings, the teacher was suspended from both salary and work, under Como house of politics, the report that reached us disclosed.    

   የመፅሐፍ መምህሩ፣ በመጀመሪያ ያለፈቃድና ያለበቂ ምክንያት በሥራ ገበታዎ ባለመገኘትዎ የተሕሳስ ወር 1990 ደመወዝዎ አይከፈልም ከተባሉ በኋላ በተከታታይ አጭር ጊዜ ውስጥ ደመወዛቸው በማስጠንቀቂያ እንዲለቀቅላቸው ተደርጐ፣ የበላይ አካል አምኖባቸው ከተመደቡበት የመፅሐፍ መምህርነት ተነስተው፣ የደብሩ ቄስ ገበዝ፣ አጋፋሪና ሊቀዲያቆናት በሚመድቡት በማንኛውም የሥራ ክፍል እንዲያገለግሉ በማለት ዳግም የመጨረሻ መስጠንቀቂያ እንደተሰጣቸው ከዘገባው መረዳት ተችሏል። 

The teacher of the Book was told that at first since he had not been presenting his job without sufficient reason, his December salary was suspended, but within a short time, his salary was released, yet a last warning was given stating that he should be working at any position the parish administrator usher deacon assigns earlier, it was possible to understand from the report.  

ሆኖም በመፅሐፍ መምህሩ ጥበቡ አያሌው ከደብሩ አስተዳዳሪ የተሰነዘረውን ፍትሕ የተጓደለ አሰራር የበላይ አካል ውድቅ እንዳደረገ ዘገባውያስረዳል።

It was also disclosed, however, higher bodies overruled the unjust bureaucracy the parish administrator exhibited. 

   ነገር ግን የደብሩ አስተዳደርና የመፅሐፍ መምህሩ ከስንት ሰጣ ገባ ጉዞ በኋላ የመፅሐፍ መምህሩ ከሥራና ደመወዝ እንዲታገዱ የተደረገበት ዋና ምክንያት ፖለቲካ ተናግረዋል የሚል ሆኖ ይገኛል። 

Nevertheless, the conclusion for the suspension of the teacher from his work and salary was that he made a political speech.  

ታዛቢና ተመልካች ለዕገዳው የተሰጠውን የፖለቲካ ምክንያት ነቅፈዋል፣ እዳውን ያስተላለፈውን አስተዳዳሪም በንቀት ዓይን ለማየት ተገደዋል። 

Observers and audiences criticized the political reason attributed to the suspension; they were also obliged to contemptuously see the administrator who passed the suspension.  

ከወራት መናቆር ሂደት የጠሉትን የመፅሐፍ መምህር በፖለቲካ ጠልፎ ለመጣል ወጥመድ መዘርጋታቸው ካህን ነኝ ከሚል ሰው አይጠበቅም ሲሉ ገልፀዋል።

They said it's not expected from a person who claims to be a priest to throw away a teacher with pretext of politics who was in disagreement with.  

   በኤርትራና በኢትዮጵያ መንግሥታት መካከል የተፈጠረውን ግጭት አንስተው፣ "ሕዝብንና ሕዝብን፣ ሕዝብንና መንግሥትን፣ ምዕመናንና ቤተ ክርስቲያንን፣ ቤተ ክርስቲያንና መንግሥትን የሚያጋጭ ንግግሩ አድርገዋል። 

With regards to the clashes between Eritrean and Ethiopian government, he was said to "engage in a speech that provokes people in to people, people in to government, congregations into the church, the church into the church, the church into the gov't.  

ተብሎ የግንቦት ወር 1990 ደመወዛቸው እንዳይከፈልና ከሰኔ ወር 1990 ጀምሮም ከሥራና ደመወዝ የታገዱት የመፅሐፍ መምህር እስካሁንም በእንግልት ላይ እንደሆኑና ዳኝነት ለማግኘት ወደ በላይ አካል በማመልከት ላይ እንደሆኑ ተያይዞ የደረሰን ዜና ያመለክታል። 

Hence, his May, 1998 salary was suspended, and from June on wards he was suspended from job and salary; he has still been under restraint, and now appealing to higher bodies for justice, the related news stated.  

ቀደም ሲል ጀምሮ በደብሩ አስተዳደርና የመፅሐፍ መምህር መካከል ከነበረው መቃቃር በመነሳት ፖለቲካ ተናግረዋል፣ ተብሎ ከሥራ የመታገድ ዕጣ የደረሳቸውመምህር የተባሉትን ፖለቲክ ተናግረው ታገዱ ማለቱ ፍፁም ለመቀበል የሚያስቸግርና በነበራቸው አለመግባባት የተወሰደ እርምጃ ሳይሆን አይቀርም የሚሉ ታዛቢዎችም አሉ።

Since there was a long-time discord between the parish administrator and the teacher of the Book, it would be very difficult to believe that the teacher was suspended due to his political speech, which left us with the option that the decision that was taken against the teacher may rather have emanated from their previous disagreement.  

   ከግል በቀል ጋር የተያያዘ መሆኑን የሚያመለክተው ነገር ቢኖር፣ የመፅሐፍ መምህርን በተራ ሥራ እንዲሰማራ ትዕዛዝ ማስተላለፉና የበላይ አካል (የአውራጃው ሰበካ ጉባኤ ጽ/ቤት ኃላፊ) በጥናት ያስተላለፈውን ትዕዛዝ ወደ ጐን በመተው የራሳቸውን አቋም መግለፃቸው እንደሆነ ታዛቢዎቹ አስምረውበታል። 

The fact that indicate it's related to personal vengeance was the act of assigning a reputed teacher of the Book to a lay-person's position, disregarding the command of the higher body (Leader of District Parish congregation Secretariat) who had passed the order based on a study which shows their own stand, observers underscored.  

ብዙ መምህራን በሚናፍቁበት ፈታኝ ዘመን እንዲህ ዓይነቱ አምባገነናዊ እገዳውን የፈፀሙትን ትዝብት ላይ የሚጥልና ቤተ ክርስቲያንንም የሚጐዳት ነው ሲሉም አሳስበዋል። 

At a time where many such teachers are looked forward to, it would be an unfavorable comment from the officials, an act of authoritarian suspension, which harms the church, they also warned.  

ያም ሆነ ይህ የመፅሐፍ መምህሩ በፖለቲካ ተሳቦ ከሥራ ተገልለዋል።

Any way, the teacher of the Book was suspended from work under the pretext of politics.   

ከፊያሜታ መስከረም 15 ቀን 1991

From Fiameta September 25, 1998
