

                          የደብረ ናዝሬት ቅ/ዮሴፍ ካህናት ቁጣ አሁንም እንደገነፈለ ነው!

            The Fury of Debre Nazareth St. Joseph Priests is still Hot!

   በአዲስ አበባ ከተማ የደብረ ናዝሬት ቅ/ዮሴፍ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን ካህናት፣ በደብራችን ዋና አስተዱዱሪ ቆመስ መልአከ ጽዮን አባ ወ/ሐዋርያት ደምሴ ላይ ሐሰተኞች የጻፉትን እንቃወማለን የሚለው ቁጣ አሁንም እንደገነፈለ ነው።

The Fury of the Addis Ababa Debre Nazareth St. Joseph Church Priests against those who falsely wrote on their church administrator, Vicar MelakeTsion Aba Wolde Hawariat Demissie, is still hot.

   «የውሸተኞች ስም አጥፊነት ሲገለጥ» በሚል ርዕስ በዋና አስተዱዱሪው ላይ የተሰነዘረውን ጽሑፍ በማውገዝና ከእውነት የራቀ ፍጹም ውሸት እንደሆነ ከደብሩ ማህበረ ካህናት ለዝግጅት ክፍላችን የደረሰው ነጥብ በነጥብ አጸፌታዊ ሰፊ ኃተታ እንደሚለው፣ በአስተዱዱሪው ላይ የጻፈው ክፍል (ሰው) የቤተ-ክርስቲያን ልጅ ሳይሆን ፀረ ሊቃውንትና ጡት ነካሽ መሆኑን ከሃሳቡና ከፍሬው ለመረዱት ተችሏል፣ በቤተ-ክርስቲያኑ የልማት እንቅስቃሴ የበገነና በትጉህ ሠራተኞች የሥራ ፍሬ የተናደደ፣ በምቀኝነት የተጠናወተ ነው፤ ብሏል።

The article which reached our office from the association of priests in the sanctuary, under the title "when the act of character Assassinators is Exposed", condemning the article written against the administrator and stating that it was far from the truth, explained point by point in response to the previous article; the side (individual) who wrote against the administrator was not a child of the church but anti-scholars and betrayer, according to the core of the message; one who was extremely angry about the development activity of church and angry at the fruits of assiduous workers; and obsessed with envy, it said.

   1- ዋና አስተዱዱሪ ቆመስ መልአከጽዮን አባ ወ/ሐዋርያት፣ በዚህ ደብር ከተመደቡበት ጊዜ አንስቶ ለምዕመናን ሰፊ የወንጌል አገልግሎት በማበርከት (በማስተማር) ለደብሩ ካህናትና ልዩ ልዩ ሠራተኞች ደግሞ በአባታዊ ምክርና በአስተዱደራዊ ሂደትም በእኩልነት ከሚመለከቱ በስተቀር አንድም ቀን የዘርኝነት ሥራና ባህሪ ያሳዩበት፣ የፈጸሙበት ጊዜ የለም። 

   1. The administrator Vicar MelakeTsion Aba Wolde Hawriat, since he has been assigned at this church has been contributing a wide service (teaching) of the gospel to the laity, living fatherly advice to priests and workers of the sanctuary and regarding the administrative process, apart from treating people squally, he has never showed partiality or displayed racism.

እንዲያውም ዘረኝነትን የሚዋጉ በአንዲት ቤተ ክርስቲያን ብቻ የሚያምኑ ስለሆኑ፣ ጸሐፊው፣ አስተዱዱሪውን በዘር ይከፋፈላሉ ያሉት በሰይጣን ምክር ተመርተው እንጂ ዋና አስተዱዱሪው ከእንዲህ ዓይነቱ የጐሳና የዘር ቆጠራ ውስጥ የራቁ ናቸው፤ ስለዚህም ጸሐፊውን እንቃወማለን።

In fact, on the contrary, he fights against racism, believes in ore church, and the writer wrote against him claiming he showed partiality, being led by Satan, otherwise the administrator is far from such racial division, and hence, we oppose the writer.

   2. የሀገርዎትን ሰዎች ብቻ ማለትም የጐንደር ሰው ለመቅጠር ቋምጠዋል ብሏል ፀሐፊው፤ ነገር ግን ጸሐፊው ግንዛቤ የጐደለው ሰው መሆኑን ራሱን በራሱ አጋልጦ አይተነዋል። 

   2. The Writer claimed that he has had a servent desire to hire his people from Gondar, but we        saw that the writer exposed himself in saying so.

የብሔር ጥላቻ እንዱለበትና በአእምሮ ውስጥ የሠረፀ ክፉ ሳይጣን መንፈስ እንዱለበት ለማወቅ ችለናል፤ በመሆኑም ለጸሐፊው እናዝንለታለን፣ እንዲታረመም እንመክረዋለን። 

He has a feeling of hatred against this race and came to realize that Satan has controlled him; so we feel sorry for the writer; we advise him to take corrective measures.

መልአከ ጽዮን አባ ወ/ሐዋርያት ግን የጐንደር ሰው ስለሆኑ የጐንደር ብሔር ተወላጅ «ሥራ ይቀጠርልኝ» ያሉበት ቀን የለም። 

Melake Tsion Aba Hawariat has never said "Employ some one" from Gondar, although he was from Gondar.

ቀጣፊነትህን ለመግለፅ ስለሆነ በቀር ቤተ-ክርስቲያናችን ያገኘችውን ሰላም ለማደፍረስና ለማወክ የተዘጋጀህ ስለሆንክ፣ በቤተ-ክርስቲያን ዘንድ ሁሉም የእግዚአብሔር ልጆች ሆነው እያሉ «አንተ የኬፋ አንተ የአጵሎስ ብለህ ለመከፋፈል መነሳትህ በአእምሮህ የተቀረን ርኩስ መንፈስ አለብህ ሲል የካህናት መልአክት ጸሐፊውን ኰንኖታል።» 

Unless to show your fake identity, and prepared to disturb the peace our church has, all church people are the children of God, and rising to say "you are Peter's, you're Apolos" shows that you are obsessed with demonic spirit, the association of priest condemned it." 

በዋና አስተዱዱሪው ላይ በተጻፈው የሐሰት ጽሑፍና የተንኮል ዓላማ የተነሳ የቤተ-ክርስቲያኑ ሰላም አይናጋም። 

Because of this fake article against the administrator and your provocative aim the peace of the church won't be disturbed.

ይላል የተቃውሞ መልሱ።

The article written in response

   3. የሰበካ ጉባኤ አባላት እንዱይሠሩ ከልክለዋል፣ የአስተዱደር ችሎታ የለዋትም ብለሃል። 

   3. You said that he forbids the preaching forum from working, he doesn't have administrative           skill.  

ቅጥፈትህን ለማጉላት ብለህ እንጂ፦ መልአከጽዮን አባ ወ/ሐዋርያት ደምሴ በአስተዱደር ችሎታው፣ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን ሙያቸውእንዲሁም በመንፈሳዊ አባትነታቸው ታላላቅ የቤተ-ክርስቲያን ልጆች ከሆኑት አንዱ ናቸው።

Unless you want to magnify your perfidy, MelakeTsion Aba WoldeHawariat Demisie is among the great son of the church who is known for his administrative skills, church profession as well as spiritual fatherhood.   

ይኸውም በደብራችን ከመጡበት ጊዜ አንስቶ ፀጥታና ሰላም ነው የሚታየው። 

Since he came to our sanctuary, peace and stability regions.

ስማቸው በክፉ መነሳት ቀርቶ መኖራቸው እንኳ አይሰማም።

Let alone to mention his name falsely, his presence is not even known. 

እኚህን አባት በቅርብ ቢያውቋቸው ኖሮና ያላቸውን የሙያ ብቃት ቢረዱእንዲህ ዓይነት አርቲ ቡርቲ ጽሑፍ በአስተዱዱሪያችን ባልሠነዘሩም ነበርይላል ጽሑፉ።

If you really knew this father closely and came to understand his professional efficiency you wouldn't have written such hocus-pocus on our administrator, the article said.

   4. «ከቤተ-ክርስቲያኑ ያለውንና ወደፊት ሊሠራ የታቀደውን ልማት በእርስዎ የሥራ ችሎታ አለመኖር ተዘግቷል ሲሉም ጽፈዋል» ነገር ግን ቅጥረኛ ስም አጥፊ መሆንህ ታወቀብህ እንጂ ቅዱስ ዮሴፍ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን ከመቼውም ያላነሠ ታላላቅ የልማት ሥራዎች እየተከናወኑም የሚገኝበት፣ በግለፅም እየታየበት ነው።

   4. You said, "The development activity that was planned to be practical in the future was closed       due to your inefficiency", but this proved to show your act of defamation, otherwise St.              Yoseph church is a place where development activities are visibly being underway, more than       any other times.

   ህዝበ-ክርስቲያኑና እኚህ ታላቅ አስተዱዱሪያችን ባደረጉት እንቅስቃሴየቅ/ሚካኤል መቃኞ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን ሥራ እየተቀላጠፈ ነው። 

Due to the laity Christian and this great administrator's activities the construction of St. Michael Kano Church is nearing its completion.

የልማት ኮሚቴውን ይዘው አኩሪ ሥራ እያስመዘገቡ ነው። 

In coordination with the development committee, he is registering a work that makes one proud.

የምናውቃቸው ለውሸተኛና ለአሉባልተኛ በሩን ዘግቶ ጆሮን ደፍኖ የልማት ሥራው በፍቅር እየተከናወነ ይገኛል። 

The development activities are being conducted efficiently, giving deaf ears to the crooked and detractors.

ስለውሸትዎ ግን አሁንም እናዝናለን።

But as to your perfidy, we still feel sorry for you. 

   5. የስብከተ ወንጌልና የሰንበት ት/ቤቱን አዱክመዋል ላልከው ደግሞ፣ እንዲያውም በአሁኑ ሰዓት ከመቼውም ጊዜ በበለጠ የተስፋፋበት ወቅት ነው። 

   5. As to your claim that he has weakened the preaching of the gospel and Sunday school, it's now, more than any other time that these two are strengthened and widened.

በሐሰትና በአሉባልታ ተልክፈህ በውሸት ተመርዘህ እንጂ እንዲህ ዓይነት የፈጠራ ወሬ ባልነዛህ ነበር። 

You wouldn't have spread such kind of perfidy had you to been infected by falsehood and back biting.

አስተዱዱሪያችን አሁንም ቢሆን ወደር የማይገኝለት ትጉህ ሰው ናቸው።

Our administrator has even now excel any other one and is always diligent.

   የቤተ-ክርስቲያኑ መኪና የግል ሽንኩርት ድንች ማመላለሻ ሆናለች ስላልከው፣ መልከአጽዮን አባ ወ/ሐዋርያት በመኪና የሚጫን ድንችና ሽንኩርት ቀርቶ በፌስታል የሚሞላ የላቸውም። 

As to your claim that the car of the church has become a vehicle for transporting private onions and potatoes, Aba WoldeHawariat let alone as much onion and potatoes to be loaded on a vehicle, he doesn't have something to be filled with a plastic beg. 

ምክንያቱም ብቸኛና በቤተ-ክርስቲያን ቅፅረ ግቢ የሚኖሩ አባት ሰለሆኑ።

Because he lives alone and lives in the premise of the sanctuary.

   ሐምሌ5 ቀን፣ 1991ዓ.ም. በተደረገው ምርጫ ለመመረጥ ብዙ ገንዘብና ጉልበት ጨርሰዋል በማለት የለመድከውን ቅጥፈት ቃል ሠንዝረዋል። 

You've said those usual words full of perfidy that in order to be elected on July 13, 1999 he has pent a lot of money and force.

በመሠረቱ ቤተ-ክርስቲያናችን ጳጳሳትን የምትመርጠው በገንዘብና በሩጫ ሳይሆን፣ ሥርዓተ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን በሚያዘው መመሪያ ደንብ ነው። 

Basically, our church elects bishops not on the basis money they spent or sort of run for election, but according to the church principles and regulations.  

መንፈሳዊ ምርጫን በገንዘብ ማለትህ ቤተ-ክርስቲያኗን መዱፈርህ መሆኑን መገንዘብ በቻልህ ነበር። 

You should have known that speaking of such ill things, as being elected due to the money one spent in church, is desecration of a holy church.  

ለነገሩ ቆመስ መልአከጽዮን አባ ወ/ሐዋርያትደምሴ ከሙያቸውና ከቤተ-ክርስቲያን ልጅነታቸው ቁርና ሐሩር ሳይፈሩ ለቤተ-ክርስቲያን ካበረከቱት አስተዋጽኦ አኳያ ጳጳስ ቢሆኑ የሚገባቸው እነጂ የሚያንሳቸው አይደለም።

In fact, Vicar MelakeTsion Aba W/Hawaryat Demssie should deserve to be a bishop, considering his professional contribution to the church and his being a son of the church since childhood in the desert and frost. 

   ከአገልግሎታቸውና ከመንፈሳዊ አባትነታቸው በመነሳት ባለፈው ምርጫ እንደሚመረጡ የበርካታ ምዕመናን እና የደብሩ ካህናት ምኞት ብቻ ሳይሆን ይመረጣሉ የሚል እምነት እንደነበር ጸሐፊው የዚህ አካባቢ ሰው ከሆንክ ታውቀው ይሆናል። 

If you are the resident of our church you would perhaps know that it was not only a wish of the many priests of the sanctuary and the laity that he would have been chosen a bishop in the last election, but it was a firm belief of them.

በቅንዓትና ምቀኝነት መንፈስ ተነድፈህ ከሆነህ እንዲህ የዘላበድከው፣ እናዝናለን። 

But if you just said this merely on the basis of envy, we feel sorry for you.

ቆመስ መልአከ ጽዮን አባ ወ/ሐዋርያት ደምሴ አንተ እንደምትላቸው ሳይሆኑ፣ ቅ/ሲኖዶስ የሚያውቋቸው ትጉህና ታታሪ አባት ጠንካራ አስተማሪ ናቸው። 

Vicar MelakeTsion Aba Hawariat Demissie is not as you described him, but known by the Holy Synod, assiduous, diligent and strong father. 

ስለዚህም ነሐሴ 19ቀን 1991 በእሳቸው ዙሪያ ያልካቸው ጽሑፍ አስተዱዱሪው ላይ የጻፈውንአውግዞታ። 

Therefore, our accusation is why the condemnation of the admin was on your article written on August 27, 1999.

አስተዱዱሪው አቁሞ እስካሁን የአስተዱዱሪያችን ስም ለምን በውሸት የተሳብን የሚል ነው። 

And we wonder you mention our admin's name in relation to falsehood.

አስተዱዱሪው የሐዲስት ትርጓሜና የተለያዩ የቤተ-ክርስቲያኒቱ ሙያዎች መምህር መሆናቸውን ከማስረጃዎቻቸው ለማረጋገጥ ተችሏል። 

It has been proud that the admin has been a teacher of the new translation and many other teachings of the church.

በደብሩ በተደረገው የካህናት ስብሰባ ሁለት ዘጋቢዎቻችን ተገኝተው ስለካህናቱ አቋም ቃል በቃል ዘግበው የተመለሱትንባለፈው ሳምንት ማቅረባችን ይታወሳል።

It was to be recalled that pertaining to the priests' stand in the priests' meeting, two of our reporters were present and disclosed work by word, their entire discussion last week.

በቦታ ጥበት ምክንያት የማህበረ ካህናቱን ጽሑፍ በሙሉ ለማቅረብ አልተቻለም።

Due to lack of space we couldn't present all in all the article of association of priests. 

ከፊያሜታ ጳጉሜን 3 ቀን 1991

From Fiameta September 8, 1999
