

                                 አንዳንድ ቀን!

                                 Some Days!

ጉዳዩ በርዕስ መደናይቱ አዲስ አበባ ባለፉት ጥቂት ቀናት የተፈፀሙ ነው። 

The event took place in the capital Addis Ababa last few days.  

ሁለቱ ተቃራኒ ጆታዋች በረጅም ዓመታት የፍቅር ቆይቶ በኋላ ሰርጋቸውን ድል አድርገው በመደገስ ጋብቻውን ለመፈፀም ተዘጋጅተዋል። 

After long years of stay a lovers, the opposite sexes are now prepared to get married, with extravaganza wedding.  

የሁለቱ ቤተሰቦችም የልጆቻቸውን አለም ለማየት ቋምጠዋል። 

The relatives of the spouses are looking forwards to their children's happiness.  

ወዳጅ ዘመድ ተፍ... ተፍ እያለ ዝግጅት አጧጡፏል።

The nears and dears have been busy here and there in the preparation.

   ቀኑ ለመቃረቡ ምልክት ይሆን ዘንድ የሰርግ ዘፈኖች በሙሽሪትና ሙሸራ ቤት ከአጥናፍ አጥናፍ እያስተጋባ ይዘፍናል። 

As an indication for the proximity of the wedding's date, wedding songs are heard form one corner to another.  

ከበሮው ከጐረቤት በተሰባሰቡ ጉብሎች ይደለቃል። 

The drums are beaten by girls who gathered from the neighborhood.  

ቅዳሜ ለእሁድ አጥቢያ ሁለቱ ፍቅረኛዋች አለማቸውን የሚያዩበት... ጉሮ ወሸባዬ የሚዘፈንበት እለት ለየራሳቸው በሀሳብ ሰመመን ሰጥመው ያስባሉ።

Saturday, the eve of the wedding, the day when the spouses are at their climax ... when the traditional wedding song is heard loudly, now reverberating in the spouses mind.  

   እሁድ ዳሱ ተጥሎ... በረጅም ድምፅ ማጉያ ሙሽራዬ... ሙሽራዬ... የወይን አበባዬ፣ አይዞሽ ሙሽሪት በርቀት ይሰማል ሙሽራው ይጠብቃል። 

On Sunday, the huge tent is planted ... in the microphone it's heard from afar, that song "my bride ... my bride ... my grape flower, don't worry my bride, the bride, the bridegroom is being awaited.  

ሕክብ ተቁነጥንጧል። 

People have become restless.  

ይኸ ሁሉ ሲሆን ግን ሙሽሪት በርቀት ትቆዝማለች በመጨረሻ ሙሽራው የመታሰሩ "መርዶ" ተሰማ። 

But when all this happens, the bride is thinking deeply, when finally the "sad" news was heard that the bridegroom was arrested.  

ከሌሎች ኤርትራውያን ሰላዮች ጋር ቅዳሜ ለእሁድ አጥቢያ መያዙ ተነገረ። 

With other Eritrean spy's it was heard he as captured on Saturday eve.  

የሞቀው ድግስ ውሃ ተቸለሰበት። 

The wedding extravaganza became spoiled. 

ሙሽራው" አለምህ ዛሬ ነው.... ዛሬን በእስር ቤት አከበረ ከድግሱ ለምሳው የሚበቃ ምግብ ተወሰደለት። 

"The groom" as the prison, enough food for lunch was brought to him from the extravaganza.  

እሱ ወዲያ ማዶ እሷ ወዲህ... ተለያዩ... ላይገናኙ...

He, there, afar, she, here ... they were separated ... not to see each other anymore ...  


ከፊያሜታ ነሐሴ 24 ቀን 1990

From Fiameta August 30, 1998
