

                                  ርዕሰ አንቀፅ

                                   Editorial

                               ትንሳዔ የሚያሻት አገር

                        A Country That Needs Resurrection 

ወያኔ/ኢህአዴግ ይህችን አገር በተቆጣጠረ ማግስት ብዙ ህልም ነበረው። 

On the morrow of TPLF/EPRDF's control over this country, it had many dreams.

ኤርትራን ማስገንጠል፣ ታላቂቱን ትግራይ መመስረት፣ አማራውንና ሌሎች ብሔሮችን ማቆርቆዝ፣ የተከበረውን የኢትዮጵያን ባንዲራ ማንቋሸሽ... ማውገዝና ማስወገዝ... ጥቂቶቹ ናቸው። 

Seceding Eritrea, Establishing the great empire of Tigray, suppressing the Amhara and other nationals, belittling ... condemning, making others denounce ... the honorable flag of Ethiopia, are few of them.

ከዚያ ህልሙ አልፎ ደግሞ ቅዠት መሰል ጨዋታም ነበራቸው «ይህን በቀን አንድ ጊዜ የሚበላ የተራበ ህዝብ በቀን አምስት ጊዜ እናበላዋለን» ብለው ነበር ዛሬም ያሉት...ያልሞቱት ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር መለስ ዜናዊ።

On top of that, they had sort of night mare-play that said, "we would be able to provide five meals for this people who only eat once day", it was Meles Zenawi ... who said this, who's not dead even today. 

ሰዎቹ ከፊል ሃሳባቸው በታላቅ ተጋድሏቸው ሞላ። 

The individuals fulfilled few of their promises through their sacrifice.

ኤርትራን አስገነጠሉ፤ ህዝቡን ከፋፍሉ፤ ምሁራንን እሰሩ፣ አስሰደዱ... ገደሉ፣ አስገደሉ። 

They have Eritrea secede, divided the people, imprisoned the elite, and chased them away ... killed them; have them killed.

ኤርትራን አስገንጥለውና ከበሮአቸውን ደልቀው ሳያበቁ አዲስ ታሪክ መጣ። 

Without finishing having seceded Eritrea, and beating their drums, a new history is made.

የኛ ያሉዋቸው የሻዕቢያ ሰዎች አፈሙዛቸውን ወደ ወያኔ ሰዎች አዞሩ። 

The EPLF individuals whom they claim as closest turned their guns towards the TPLF indivduals.  

«ታቂቱን ትግራይ» ለማጥፋት ተማማሉ... ተታኮሱ... ዛሬም ቀጥሏል።

They vowed to destroy "the great empire of Tigray" ... shot guns at them ... continued even today.

የኢትዮጵያን ባንዲራ «ከጨርቁ ጉዱይ የለንም» ያላሉትን ያህል ዛሬ ሳይወዱ በግድ ማውለብለብ ጀመሩ። 

As if they didn't say, "we don't care about the piece of cloth" referring to the flag of Ethiopia, today they are obliged to fly the flag.

እርስ በርሱ ሊያጫርሱት የነበረውም ብሔር ባልተጠበቀ ሁኔታ አንድነቱን አጠናክሮ፣ ድርና ማግ ሆኖ ለሃገሩ ህልውና ከማንም በፊት ቆመ።

The nationals whom they wanted to divide and kill each other, have in an unexpected condition strengthened its unity, becoming warp and weft, stood for its county's existence, more than anyone else. 

ወያኔ/መቼም ያላሰበውና ያልጠበቀው የህዝብ ኃይል ታላቅነቱን አስመሰከረ። 

The people, whom TPLF never thought and expected of having such a nature, have proved to display their greatness.

ተጋድሎውን አሳየ። 

It showed its sacrifice.

አንድነቱን አጠናከረ። 

It strengthened its unity.

ያለሙትን ሳይሆን ያላሰቡት ተአምር አምላክ አሳያቸው። 

The creator taught them through miracles they never dreamt nor ever thought about before.    

ይህም ሁሉ ሆኖ ግን ዛሬም እዚያው ድሮ ላይ ናቸው። 

Yet, after all these, they are still living as they used to.

ምሁራንን ማሳደዱንና ሌሎችን ማውገዝና ማስወገዙን ስራዬ ብለው ተያይዘውታል።

They seriously cling to their acts of chasing the elite and condemning others, having them condemned.

ይህች አገር ትንሳዔ ያሻታል። 

This country needs resurrection.

ህዝቡን የሚያከብር መንግስትና መሪ ያስፈልጋታል። 

She seeks a leader and a government who honors the people.

የህዝብን ስሜትና መንፈስ ተከትሎ የሚንቀሳቀስ ኃይል ያሻታል። 

She needs a force that acts in accordance to people's feelings and spirit.

ይህ ካልሆነ ግን ወደ ሃያአንደኛው ክፍለ ዘመን እየገሰገስን ያለን... እጅና አንደበታችንን የተለጎምን የመንግስት ባሪያዎች ልንሆን ነው!!

Otherwise, we would be heading towards the twenty first century like slaves of government whose hands and mouth are fastened!!

ጎበዝ... ምን ስንባል እንደነበርን፣ ምን ሲፈፀምብን እንደነበር ከረሳን ታላቅ እንቅልፍ ላይ ነንና እንንቃ። 

Hey! Bravo compatriot ... if we forget what we were said, what were enacted up on us, we may have been in deep sleep, so wake up.

በመጪው ዓመት የተቃዋሚ ኃይሎችን ያካተተ ጠቅላላ ምርጫ እንደሚካሄድ ከወዲሁ እየተነገረ ነው። 

Next year, it's told now that an election that includes opposition forces would be conducted.

ማን ሊሰራልን እንደሚችል ከወዲሁ ማወቅ ብልህነት ነው። 

It's wise to know before hand who could work for us

እየሞተች ያለችውን አገራችንን ጭራሹን የሚገድላት አንሻም። 

We don't need someone who, would once and for all, kill the already dying country.

ይልቁንም ትንሳዔዋን እናስብ!!      

Instead, let's think about her resurrection!!     

ከፊያሜታ ሐምሌ 21 ቀን 1991

From Fiameta July 28, 1999
