

                        የቤተክርስቲያኑ ዘረፋ እውነተኛ ገፅታ ተገለጠ

              The Real Picture of the Looting of the Church was Exposed

   ዘነበ ወርቅ አካባቢ የሚገኘውና በግንቦት ወር 1990 ዓ.ም የአቡነ አረጋዊ (ገብረክርስቶስ ቤተክርስቲያን) በዓል በተከበረበት ዕለት በምዕመናን ልማት ኮሚቴ የተሰበሰበውን የስለት ገንዘብ ከአዲስ አበባ ሀገረ ስብከት ተቆጣጣሪዎች ለማዳን ሲባል ተደብቆ በዚያው ጠፍቷል።

The money collected from people who made vows by the laity development committee on an anniversary of Abune Aregawi (Gebrechristos church) disappeared before the controllers from National Preaching identify it.

   ይኸው ጉዳይ እየተባባሰ መጥቶ የደብሩ ቁጥጥር ኃላፊ ከስራ ሲወገድ የደብሩ አስተዳደር ደግሞ ከአዲስ አበባ ወደ ድሬዳዋ እንዲዛወሩ ተደርጓል። 

The case has been very much aggravated by the incident and the controlling official of the church was sacked from work while the church administrator was made to transfer to Diredawa.  

ሀገረ ስብከቱ በራሱ በኩል አንዳንድ እርምጃዎችን የወሰደ ቢሆንም አሁን ድረስ የጠፋው ገንዘብ ገቢ አለመሆኑ ግን እያነጋገረ ነው። 

Although the National Preaching Office has taken some measures, the money that disappeared hasn't yet found and gotten in the ledger, and this has been a talking-point.  

ይህን ጉዳይ በማጋለጣቸው በአስተዳዳሪው በኩል እርምጃ ተወስዶባቸው ለነበሩ የቤተክርስቲያን ልጆች የመንበረ ፓትርያርኩ ልዩ ፅ/ቤት የሰጠው ምላሽ ለጊዜው አይታወቅም። 

The response that was given from the special office of the patriarch to children of the church, who exposed this incident and was taken up on measure through administrator, was not known for the time being.

ለፓትርያርኩ ለሀገረ ስብከቱ ጽ/ቤት ቀርቦ የነበረው ደብዳቤ ግን ስለተፈፀመው ዘረፋ ያብራራል። 

The letter presented to the patriarch and for the office of National Preaching, however, explained about the looting.  

የዚህኑ ማመልከቻ ሙሉ ቃል ቀጥሎ ስናቀርብ አንባቢዎችም የበለጠ ግንዛቤ ሊያገኙ እንደሚችሉ በማመን ነው።

When we present this full text of the application letter, it is belief that they would get better understanding. 

   ለኢትዮጵያ ኦርቶዶክስ ተዋሕዶ ቤተክርስቲያን የአዲስ አበባ ሃገረ ስብከት ጽ/ቤት፦

To the Ethiopian Orthodox Monophysitism Church, Addis Ababa Office of the National Preaching,

   አዲስ አበባ

Addis Ababa

   አመልካች እነ ወ/ሮ አፀደ ድጋፌ አድራሻዬ ወረዳ 24 ቀበሌ 15 የቤት ቁጥር 614 ሲሆን በደ.ከ.አ.አ.ቅዱስ ገብረ ክርስቶስ ቤ/ክ የሂሳብ ሹም ስሆን የማመለክተው ፍሬ ነገር እነሆ።

I, Mrs. Atsede Degafe whose address is district 24, kebele 15, House no. 614 and who work as an accountant of the Abune Aregawi Gebrekirstos Church, apply the following.

   ይኸውም ግንቦት 14 ቀን 1989 ዓ.ም የአቡነ አረጋዊ ዓመተ በአል ዕአት በዚሁ በትተጠቀሰው ደብር ብር 7986(ሰባት ሺህ ዘጠኝ መቶ ሰማንያ ስድስት ብር) ለደብሩ አስፓልት ማሰሪያ ተብሎ በልማት መልክ ከምዕመናን ተሰብስቦ ከመቶ አስር ከአዲስ አበባ ሃገረ ስብከት ተቆጣጣሪዎች ለማዳን ተብሎ በደብሩ የሰበካ ጉባዔ ሊቀመንበር ትዕዛዝ ተሸሽጎ ነበር።

On May 22, 1997 in the afforested Church 7986 (Seven thousand nine hundred eighty six) Birr was collected for the purpose of asphalting the road in the name of development, but to avoid the payment of the ten percent income that's to be paid for the Addis Ababa National Preaching office and from being detected by the controllers of the office, the money was hidden by the church's chairman of preaching congregation.  

   ይሁን እንጂ ከዚሁ ብር ውስጥ ብር 2500 (ሁለት ሺህ አምስት መቶ) በሞዴል 64 ግቢ የሆነ ቢሆንም ቀሪው ብር 5486(አምስት ሺህ አራት ምቶ ሰማኒያ ስድስት) ሞዴል 64 ያልያዘና ገቢ መሆኑን ስላላወኩ ደግሜ ደጋግሜ በቃል ብጠይቃቸውም ምንም መልስ ባለማግኘቴ ሐምሌ 9/11/89 ለደብሩ ጽ/ቤት በጽሁፍ ማመልከቴ ይታወቃል።

Nevertheless, it is to be recalled that out of these Birr, 2500 (two thousand five hundred) has gotten in to the ledger by Model 64, the rest 5486 (five thousand four hundred eighty six) Birr had not entered through model 64 and since I don't know as to the where about of this money, and since I asked orally time and again, though of no use, I wrote an request letter to the church office on July 17/8/97.  

   ሆኖም አመለካከቴ በቅርብ ጊዜ ውስጥ እንድታሳውቁኝ ባታሳውቁኝ ግን ለሃገረ ስብከቱና ለመንበረ ፓትርያርኩ ልዩ ጽ/ቤት ማሳወቄን በግልባጭ የፃፍኩ ስለሆነ ሆኖም ምንም መልስ ስላላገኘሁ ወደዚሁ ማመልከት ግድ ሆኖብኛል።

Hence, if you don't clear up this issue soon and let me know, I had already make a copy of this letter to the office of National Preaching and the Special Office of the Patriarch, and since there was no response from there, I am now obliged to rewrite to this office.

   አመልካች ወ/ሮ አፀደ ድጋፌ

Applicant Mrs. Atsede Degafe

   ግልባጭ፤ ለመንበረ ፓትርያርኩ ልዩ ጽ/ቤት

Copy, for Special Office of the Patriarch

   አዲስ አበባ

Addis Ababa           

ይህ የሂሳብ ሹሟ ደብዳቤ ሲሆን በዚህ ደብዳቤ ምክንያት አስተዳደሩ ከስራ እስከማገድ ደረጃ ደርሶ ነበር። 

While this is the letter of the accountant, the administration had taken a measure up to suspending her from work.  

በምዕመናን የልማት ኰሚቴ ስብሰባ በሰበካ ጉባዔው ሊቀመንበር የባከነውን ገንዘብ ጠያቂ አጥቷል። 

Nobody seems to ask about the money that as wasted by the chairman of the preaching congregation. 

የአ.አ ሃገረ ስብከት ጉዳዮን በምስክሮች ያረጋገጠ ቢሆንም ገንዘቡን ለማስመለስ ተጨማሪ እርምጃ ሲወስድ አልተስተዋሉም።

Although the Addis Ababa office of National preaching proved the case through witnesses, they were not seen to take measures to have the money back.  

				ከፊያሜታ ታኅሣሥ 8 ቀን 1990

                        From Fiameta December 17, 1998  
