   

                       ከልደታ የተወሰዱት ቅርሳ ቅርሶች የደረሱበት ጠፋ

       The Relics that were taken from St. Mary Lideta, Church Disappeared 

                          አንድ ጽላት በፖሊስ ቁጥጥር ሥር ውሏል

                   One Tablet of the Law was Under Police control 

   ከማህደረ ስብሐት ቅድስት ልደታ ለማርያም ቤተ-ክርስቲያን በተለያዩ ጊዜያት የደብሩን ዕቃ ቤት በማስገደድና በማስፈራራት በጽ/ቤቱ ኃላፊዎች በኩል የተወሰዱት ብርቅዬ ቅርሳ ቅርስ የደረሱበት መጥፋቱ ተገለፀ። 

The unique relics that were taken at different times from the sanctuary of St. Mary church by the officials of the church office, threatening the head of the treasury house of the sanctuary had disappeared, it was disclosed. 

ከእነዚህ ውድና ብርቅ ቅርሶች መካከል ፤ የወርቅ ካባዎች ፣ የብር ፅናጽሎች ፣ የብር መቋሚያዎች ፣ የብራና ስንክሳር እንደሚገኙበትና

Among these priceless unique antiquities, golden mantles, silver sistrums, silver prayers sticks, written documents made on parchment, are found.

   ለደብሩ ጽሐፊ ዲያቆን ፍሥሐ ኪዱነ ቃል ሠርግ በሚል የተወሰዱ በርካታ ውድና ዘመናዊ የሆኑ ምንጣፎችም በዚያው ከቀሩ ዘመን ያለፋቸው መሆኑን ከስፍራው የደረሰን ዘገባ አመልክቷል።

In a pretext of borrowing them for the wedding ceremony of the secretary of the sanctuary, Deacon Fisseha Kidane kal, several expensive and modern carpets had never been returned, the report from the area pointed out.

   በደብሩ ውስጥ የተፈጸሙት ሕገ ወጥ ድርጊቶችና ዝርፊያዎች በአሁኑ ሰዓት እየተጋለጡ የሚገኙ መሆናቸውን የገለፀው ዘገባ ፣ በዚሁ አሳፋሪ ተግባር ውስጥ ጸሐፊውንና «ቁጥጥር ተብዬውን» ጨምሮ በገንዘብ ነክ ዙሪያ የሚገኙት ክፍሎች በግምባር ቀደም ሳይዘፈቁበት እንደማይቀሩ ሥጋት ብቻ ሳይሆን በእርግጠኛነት እየተነገረ መሆኑን አስገንዝቧል።

The illegal acts and theft performed in the sanctuary are by now being exposed, and in this shameful act the secretary and including these "so-called controller" and financial bodies seem to not only to be suspicious of being drowned in to it, but are surely told to have been taking part in it, it was disclosed.   

   ከልጅነት ሕይወታቸው ጀምሮ ለጋብቻ እስከደረሱበት ጊዜ ድረስ በልደታ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን አጥቢያ ካደጉት ባልና ሚስት «የጋብቻ ካርድ ዋጋ» በሚል ብር 3, 000 (3ሺህ) በሕገ ወጥ መንገድ የተመነተፈውና የባልና ሚስቱ ውጭ ሐገር የመሄድ እድላቸው የተበላሸባቸው፣ በአጠቃላይ ቃላት የማይገኝለት የዝርፊያ ተግባር የተፈጸመው በዚሁ ደብር እንደሆነ ነው ዘገባው ያስረዱው። 

The report explained that from those spouses that grew up from childhood up to the age of marriage in a pretext of "the wedding certificate price, 3000 (3 thousand) Birr was stolen illegally, and had been the cause for the failure of the spouses chances to go abroad; in general it's from this sanctuary that such despicable looting was conducted.

ባልና ሚስቱ «ካሳደገችን፣ ከተጋባንባት ቤተ-ክርስቲያን የጋብቻ ካርድ መውሰድ አለብን» ብለው ወደ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን በሄዱ ኃላፊነት በተሰጣቸው ሰዎች ዘንድ እንዲህ ዓይነቱ አስነዋሪና የቆሸሸ ሥራ ተሠርቶ በመገኘቱ «ጉድ» የሚያሰኝ ሆኗል። 

The spouses believed that they must take the wedding certificate from the church "that we grew up and got married", but it was despicable to see such shameful and unclean crime committed by officials who were given responsibility.   

ባልና ሚስቱ ግን የደረሰባቸውን በደል በመዘርዘር ቤተ-ክርስቲያን የሞራል ካሳ እንድትክሳቸው ያለአግባብ የተወሰደባቸው ገንዘብ እንዲመለስላቸው እየጠየቁ ጸሐፊው ፈጽሟል በተባለው ሕገ ወጥ ድርጊት ዘብጥያ ወርዶ ከሰነበተ በኋላ ድንጋጤውና የቆየ በሽታቸው ተዱምረው ሕመሙ ሲፀናበት የዋስ መብቱ ተጠብቆ ከእሥር ቤት እንደወጣ ለማወቅ ተችሏል። 

The spouses detailing the injustice committed up on them requested the church to pay moral compensation, paying the money that was taken from them illegally, while the secretary was sent to prison but after a while were released on bail for the long sickness together with the shock he got made him in severe health crisis, it was disclosed. 

በፍ/ቤት እጅግ ብዛት ያለው ክስ እንዱለበት የሚነገርለት ጸሐፊው ሰሞኑን ፖሊስ ጣቢያ ታሥረው በሰነበቱበት ወቅት ሲወጣም ሲገባም «ሌባ! ሌባ!» የሚል የአካባቢው ነዋሪዎች ድምፅ ተበራክቶ እንደነበር ተያይዞ የመጣው ዜና ያመለክታል።

The secretary who was said to have had many changed in the court was called "thief! Thief!" by the people around the area the court while appearing these, the news that came from there pointed out.  

   ጸሐፊው በሕመም ምክንያት ወደ ቢሮ መግባቱን ካቆመ ረጅም ጊዜ ያደረገ መሆኑን የገለጸው ዘገባ፣ የሀገረ ስብከቱ ጽ/ቤት በቁጥር 8030/28/91 ሐምሌ 23 ቀን 1991 ማህተሙን እንዲያስረክብ ደብዱቤ ቢጽፍም አሻፈረኝ በማለቱ ሌላ አዲስ ማህተም እንዲቀረጽ መደረጉን አውስቷል። 

The report which expressed that the secretary had for long stopped going to his office due to sickness, also pointed out that although the office of National Preaching in a letter written to him by No. 8030/28/99, July 31, 1999 requested him to hand over the seal of the office, he declined to do so.

በገንዘብና ንብረት ላይ ከፍተኛ ብክነት እንደተደረገ እየተጋለጠ በመምጣቱ ምክንያት አስፈላጊውን ማጣራት ለማድረግ ይመለከታቸዋል የተባሉ ፣ ሰነድ የሚገኙባቸው ሁሉ ታሽገው እንደሚገኙም ተገልጿል።

As a result of this exposure of financial and property embezzlement all the pertinent necessary offices of documentation are still sealed. 

   «ኦዲት ይደረግ» የሚለው የአካባቢው ህዝበ ክርስቲያንና ማህበረ ካህናት ሙሉ ድምፅ ሲሆን፣ «ኦዲት የሚደረገው በመንግስት ኦዲተሮች መሆን አለበት» የሚል አቋምም አለ።

The area Christian laity and priests unanimously agreed to have him "audited" where as there are still positions taken to "have him audited by government auditors". 

   ከጊዜ ወደ ጊዜ እየተባባሰ ስለመጣው የልደታ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን ሀብትና ንብረት መባከንና የቆየ አስተዱደራዊ ብልሽት ምክንያት ጉዱዩን ወደ ሕግ ቦታ በማድረስና አስፈላጊው ክትትል በማድረግ ላይ በሚገኙ የደብሩ አገል ጋይ ካህናት ላይ አደጋ ለማድረስ የጸሐፊው ቡድን የሆኑ ክፍሎች ሙከራ አድርገው የነበሩና አሁንም እንቅስቃሴ እንዱላቸው ተዘግቧል። 

As the embezzlement of Lideta church's finance and property have become aggravated from time to time, as a result of administrative deficiency there are priests of the sanctuary who are striving to take the case to the legal institution and take the necessary follow-up, but the secretary's group are heard to have made an attempt of attack, and are said to have plans to do so now, it was disclosed.

የንብረትና የገንዘብ ብክነቱ በአዲሱ የሰበካ ጉባኤና አስተዱዱሪው በኩል የላቀ ቁጥጥር መደረግ ከተጀመረ ወዲህ ለማመን በሚያስቸግር ሁኔታ በአንድ ወር ብቻ ብር 280, 000 (ሁለት መቶ ሰማንያ ሺ) የገባበት ጊዜ መኖሩ ብዙዎቹን አስደንቋል።

After the new preaching forum and administrator started strict control, it was unbelievably witnessed to have gotten 280,000 (two hundred eighty thousand) Birr only in a month time, which surprised many.       

   በዝርፊያው የሚያገኙት ገንዘብ ያከተመባ ቸው ጸሐፊው መሆኑ ቡድኖቻቸው ግን ጥፋታቸውን አገር አውቆባቸው አልታየብንም፣ አልታወቀብንም ብለው የፈጸሙት እኩይ ተግባራቸው በአደባባይ ከወጣ በኋላ ያልሆነ የሐሰትና ሰንካላ ምክንያት በማቅረብ ጭራሹን ጉዱዩን ከማይመለከት ከመንግሥት ፖለቲካ ጋር በማገናኘት ውንጀላዎችን እያሴሩ እንደሚገኙ ሪፖርተራችን የሰበሰባቸው ዘገባዎች ያስረዱሉ።

The secretary as well as its groups whom the income have stopped coming, are trying to hide their wrongs, that had already been obvious to all, and are now in public attempting to connect the case with politics irrelevantly, are plotting to accuse the rest, the report explained.  

ይህ በእንዲህ እንዱለ አንድ ጽላት በሽያጭ ድርድር ላይ እያለ በወረዱ 22 ፖሊስ ጣቢያ መያዙን ታውቋል። 

In the mean time, it was disclosed that one tablet of the law was caught jut before it was sold by district 22 police.

ጽላቱ ከየት እንደመጣ እስካሁን የታወቀ ነገር ባይኖርም፦ በልደታ ቤተ-ክርስቲያን ካህናት ጥቆማና በወረዱ 22 ፖሊስ አባላት ርብርብ ጽላቱም፣ ጽላቱን ይዘው የተገኙት ግለሰብም በወረዱ 22 ፖሊስ ቁጥጥር ሥር ሰንብተው ወደ ማዕከላዊ ፖሊስ ምርመራና ማስተባበሪያ ጽ/ቤት መሄዱቸውን ከስፍራው የመጣው የዜና ዘገባ አስረድቷል።

While nothing is known as to where the tablet of the law came from, the person who was in possession of it and the tablet of the law were caught by priests of the Lideta church and district 22 police force, had stayed for some time in district 22 police station, and were sent to central police investigation and coordination office, the news that came from the area disclosed.  

   ይህ ዜና እስከተጠናቀረበት ቀንና ሰዓት ድረስ ወደ ማዕከላዊ ስለሄደው ጽላት ውጤቱ ምን ላይ እንደደረሰ የታወቀ ነገር የለም። 

Up to the time this report was organized, nothing is known as to what happened to the tablet of the Law that went to the central police.

ሆኖም ጽላቱን በ70 (ሰባ) ብር ሊሸጥ ስምምነት ላይ ደርሶ እንደነበረ የተነገረለት ግለሰብ እጅ ከፍንጅ ተይዞ በመቀፍደዱ ታዛቢዎች ታሪካዊ ሥራ ብለውታል።

Nonetheless, since the individual who was said to sell the tablet of the law by 70 (seventy) Birr was caught red handed, observers said it was a historical work.  

ከፊያሜታ ነሐሴ 19 ቀን 1991

From Fiameta August 25, 1999
