

                               "ግራ ቀኙም ተካረዋል"

                      "Both the Right and Left Came to a Head"

                             ፓትርያርኩ አምርረዋል (?)

                       The Patriarch took too much to heart (?)

   የሃይማኖት ሕፀፅ እንዳለባቸውና ቀኖና ቤተ-ክርስቲያንን እንዳፋለሱ፣ የቤተ-ክህነትን አስተዳደር ከምንጊዜውም በተለየ መልኩ እንዲበለሻሽ ያደረጉ መሆናቸው የሚነገርላቸው አባ ጳውሎስ የሚቃወሙኝ እኔ እያለሁ ቤተ ክህነት አይገቧትም ማለታቸው ተሰማ።

Aba Paulos, who's told to have religious fallacy and disrupt the church's dogma, and spoiled the administration of the clergy, was now heard as saying they won't get in to the clergy as long as they are in opposition with me.

   ለፓትርያርኩ ቀራቢ ከሆኑ ወገኖች የደረሱን የዜና ምንጮች እንደሚያመለክቱት ፓትርያርኩ ሰሜን በአደባባይ እንዲጠፋ ያደረጉና የዕለት ዕለት የሚቃወሙኝ በሕዝብ ዘንድ ታአማኒነት እንዳጣና እንድጠላ ያደረጉኝ ተቃዋሚዮቼ በእኔ የሥልጣን ዘመን ቤተ ክህነትን አይረግጧትም በማለት መዛታቸውንም ገልፀዋል።

The news source who were close to the patriarch pointed out that the patriarch said that those who publicly defame my reputation and be against me day after day, and my enemies who made me unpopular and hated among people would never tread on around the clergy in my leadership time.  

   የተቃዋሚዮቻቸው አቋምም ከእሳቸው አቋም በከረረ መልኩ የሃይማኖት ሕፀፅ ካለበትና ለቤተ ክርስቲያን ሀብትና ንብረት መዘረፍ ምክንያት የሆነ፣ ለአስተዳደር መግማማት ተዋናይና መሪ ከሆነ የስም የሃይማኖት መሪ ጋር ህብረት ፈጥረን አንጓዝም፣ በሃይማኖትና በታሪክ ተወቃሽ አንሆንም፣ ከማይመሳሰለን ጋር በማይመች አካሄድ አንጠመድም፣ የሚል የለየ አቋም ላይ የደረሱ መሆናቸው ተጠቁሟል። 

The opposition stands also, even much grave than the patriarch, was not to go along with and work in fellowship with a leader that has a religious fallacy and one who's a reason for embezzlement of the church's money and property, an actor for administrative abuse, and only a nominal leader; we don't want to be blamed for and be accountable by history, and we won't be trapped by someone who's uncomfortable to us. 

ሌላው የተቃዋሚዮቻቸው ነጥብ፣ እስካሁን በኢትዮጵያ ኦርቶዶክስ ተዋህዶ ቤተ ክርስቲያን ተሰምቶም ተደርጐም የማይታወቅ ከጵጵስና በኋላ ቆብ ጥሎ ከሴት ጋር የማስታወሻ ፎቶ መነሳት አባ ጳውሎስ የመጀመሪያው ናቸው ሲሉ ድርጊቱን በይፋ ማውገዛቸውና መኰነናቸው ተሰምሮበታል።

and up to this time in the Ethiopian orthodox church it has not been heard a patriarch taking photograph with a lady, putting down his cap, Aba Paulos is the first one, said the opposition, publicly condemning the act.

   ሥጋዊ እልህ ተጫጭኑአቸው የተቃዋሚዮቻቸውን ጥያቄ መስማት እንደተሳናቸው የሚነገርላቸው አባ ጳውሎስ፣ በዘመናቸው ቤተ ክርስቲያን ሰላም በማጣት እንደታወከች በአንደበታቸው ይናገሩ እንጂ መፍትሔ መሻት ግን እስካሁን እንዳልፈለጉ እየተነገረ ነው። 

Aba Paulos who is told as being under the influence of fleshy obstinacy, and, as a result, gave deaf ears to his opposition's request, although he speaks that the church in his time is disturbed, it was told that he doesn't want to seek resolve.  

ከጵጵስና በኋላ ቆባቸውን ጥለው በተለያየ ጊዜያት ስለተነሷቸው ፎቶዎችም ቢሆን፣ "እኔ ብቻ ነኝ ኃጢአተኛ? 

With regards to the snapshots he had at different times after he was ordained bishop and put in the tabloids, "Am I the only sinner?

ፎቶዬን እየለቃቀሙ በጋዜጦች የሚያወጡብኝ" በማለት በጉባኤ ፊት መናገራቸውን ውስጠ አዋቂዎቹ ተናግረዋል።  

They collect my photographs and put them on the tabloids," he told in a congregation, the sources mentioned.   

ተቃዋሚዮቻቸው ግን እንዲህ ዓይነቱ ሰው ቤተ ክርስቲያንን ሊመራትም ሆነ ሊያስተዳድራት ከቶውኑ አይቻልም፣ ሲሉ ሃሳባቸውን ደምድመዋል። 

The oppositions, however, concluded that such kind of a person can never lead or administer the church. 

በሁለቱም ግራ ቀኝ ያለው አቋም እየከረረ መምጣቱን ምንጮቹ አመልክተዋል።

The sources indicated that the position of both sides have come to the head.

   ፓትርያርኩ አባ ጳውሎስ ኢትዮጵያ ውስጥ ካሉ ተቃዋሚዮቼ ጋር እርቅ ከምፍጠርና ከምደራደር ይልቅ በውጭ አገር ሆነው ከሚቃወሙኝ (ከነ አባ መልከ ፄዴቅ) ጋር ብታደራድሩኝ ይሻላል፣ በማለት ከሚቃወሟቸው ጋር እርቀ ሰላም እንደማይሹ ማግለፃቸውን ቀራቢዎቻቸው ሲናገሩ ተደምጠዋል።

The close sources were heard as saying that the patriarch, Aba Paulos said that instead of trying to negotiate me with oppositions in Ethiopia, it's much better if you do so with my oppositions abroad, (like Aba Melke Tsedek); and revealed that he doesn't want any peace negotiation with the oppositions. 

                           ከፊያሜታ ግንቦት 26 ቀን 1990

                           From Fiameta June 3, 1998
