

                 ፊያሜታ ጋዜጣ የተከሰሰችው በሁለቱ ፕሬዝዳንቶች ሳቢያ መሆኑ ታወቀ

   Fiameta Newspaper was accused due to the Two Presidents' Accusations, it was disclosed

                1ኛ ክስ የሃገሪቱን ፕሬዝዱንት የዶ/ር ነጋሶ ጊዱዱን ክብር ነክታችኋል

           1st Accusation – you've dishonored the name of Dr. Negasso Gidada 

                  2ኛ ክስ የመዐህድ ተ/ፕሬዝዳንትን የበሰበሰ እንቁላል ብላችኋል

       2nd Accusation – you've insulted the Acting President of AAPO as rotten egg

በፊያሜታ ጋዜጣ ላይ በተደጋጋሚ እየተሰነዘረ ያለው ክስ እንደቀጠለ ነው። 

The recurrent accusation on Fiameta newspaper is continuing.

እስካሁን ድረስ በፕሬስ ታሪክ ውስጥ ታይቶና ተሰምቶ በማይታወቅ ሁኔታ አስራ አንድ ክሶች የተመሰረተ መሆኑ ሲታወስ ፤ አሁን በቅርቡ ደግሞ በሁለቱ ፕሬዝዱንቶች ክስ ሳቢያ በፊያሜታ ጋዜጣ ዋና አዘጋጅ ላይ ተጨማሪ ውንጀላ ተካሂዷል። 

It's to be recalled that never ever has been heard or seem of eleven accusations in the press law, and recently due to the accusations of the two presidents, additional charges have been filed against the editor-in-chief of Fiameta newspaper.

ይህ ደግሞ አጠቃላዩን ክስ ወደ አስራ ሶስት ከፍ አድርጎታል።

This makes the overall charges to rise in to thirteen. 

   ይህ ዓይነቱ የክስ ብዛት እስካሁን ያልታየ ሲሆን በመንግስት በኩል እየተወሰደ ያለውም እርምጃ የጋዜጣውን ህልውና ለማጥፋት ሆን ተብሎ የሚፈፀም ተግባር አስመስሎታል። 

This kind of accusation has never been seen or heard of and the measures that are being taken by the government has made it seem as if it was taken to destroy the existence of the newspaper at all. 

እስካሁንም ድረስ ከፍተኛ የመንግስት ባለስለጣናት (ሚንስትሮችን ጨምሮ) የክልል ፕሬዘዱንት ፣ የመዐህድ ተቀዱሚ ፕሬዘዱንት ፣ የሃገሪቱ ኘሬዘዱንት፣ የሃይማኖት መሪ ፓትሪያርክና ፖሊስ ኰሌጅ ስምና ክብር ተነክቷል ከሚሉት ክሶች ጀምሮ ህዝቡን አነሳስቷል... ህዝብ በመንግስት ላይ እምነት እንዲያጣ አድርጓል ... የህዝቡን ህሊና የሚያናውጥ ዜና አቅርቧል፤ የሚሉና ተመሳሳይ ክሶች በጋዜጣው አዘጋጅ ላይ ተመስርተዋል።

Up to now, accusations include dishonoring higher officials (including ministers), regional presidents, the acting first president of AAPO, the nation's president religious leaders and patriarch and police college's name and honor have been character-assassinated, incited the people ... made the people lose rust in the government ... presented news that trouble people's conscience, and other similar charges were filed against the editor of the newspaper.

   የጋዜጣው አዘጋጅ ከላይ በተጠቀሱት ክሶች ሳቢያ ከወረዱ ፖሊስ ጣቢያ ጀምሮ እስከ አዋሳ ድረስ ተወስዶ የእስር እና የልዩ ልዩ ቅጣቶች ገፈት ቀማሽ ሆኗል።

The editor of the newspaper due to the above-cited accusations were obliged to taste the scum of the earth at different places from the district police station up to Awasa town prisons. 

   አቃቤ ህግ በሚያቀርባቸው ክሶችም ላይ ዋና አዘጋጁ ህዝቡ በመንግስት ላይ እምነት እንዲያጣ አድርጓል ወይም የሃሰት ዜና አሰራጭቷል ይበል እንጂ፤ ይህ ስለመሆኑ አንዱችም የሰው መረጃ አላቀረበም። 

Although the prosecutor said that the editor-in-chief has made the people lose trust in the government or disseminated false news, not even one tangible evidence did it ring, to ratify the charge.

የተሰራጨው ዜና ሃሰት ስለመሆኑ ወይም የህዝብን እምነት ስለማናወጡ ተጨባጭ መረጃ በፍርድ ቤት አልታየም። 

No tangible evidence was seen in the court pertaining to the disseminated news being false, nor to the news as being troubling to people's conscience.

ይህ ዓይነቱ የአቃቤ ህግ ክስ አግባብ አለመሆኑንና ፍርድ ቤቱም ውድቅ እንዲያደርግ ዋና አዘጋጁ ጠይቆ አንድም ጊዜ አልተሳካም። 

While the edition-in chief requested that this kind of accusation by the prosecutor was not proper and hence should be overruled, it was not successful.

ይህ አይነቱ አካሄድ ደግሞ የዋና አዘጋጁ መጨረሻ ምን ሊሆን እንደሚችል ከወዲሁ ግልፅ እየሆነ መጥቷል።

And this kind of working procedure showed clearly before hand what kind of fate the editor-in-chief, may have.

   የጋዜጣው ዋና አዘጋጅ ባለፈው ሳምንት በተመሰረቱበት ሁለት ተጨማሪ ክሶች ምክንያት ፊያሜታ ጋዜጣ ከህትመት ውጪ እንዲሆን ውሳኔ ላይ የደረሰ ቢሆንም ፤ በፊያሜታ ጋዜጣ አንባቢዎች በነፃ ፕሬስ ቤተሰቦችና በተለይም በሌሎች የነፃ ፕሬስ ባልደረቦች ድጋፍና አበረታችነት ስራው ላልተወሰነ ጊዜ እንዲቀጥል ወስኗል።

Although due to teh additional two charges it was filed agaist teh editor-in-chief, Fiameta newspaper was decided to be out of publication, the news paper was again decided to continue for unlimited time as a result of the support and encouragement of readers of Fiameta, families of free press and other free press colleagues.  

   የዚህ ጋዜጣ ሪፖርተር ከዋና አዘጋጁ ከአቶ ዱዊት ከበደ ጋር ተነጋግሮ ይህን ምላሽ አግኝቷል «...የተነሳንበት ዓላማ ከሞላ ጎደል ግቡን መትቷል። 

The reporter of this newspaper, after he talked over got a response from the editor-in-chief, Dawit Kebede, "... the objective which we aimed at have more or less reached its targets.

ነፃ ፕሬስ፣ በነፃ መንፈስ በህዝቡ ውስጥ እንዲሰርፅ የማድረግ ህልማችን በተወሰነ ደረጃ ተሳክቷል። 

Our dream of instilling in free press with free spirit in the people has to a certain extent met is targets.

እኛ ነፃውን ፕሬስ የተቀላቀልነው የድርሻችንን መስዋዕትነት ለመክፈል ነው። 

We joined the free press to sacrifice our own share.

ይህን መስዋዕትነት ደግሞ ከሚገባው በላይ ከፍለናል።

And we've paid this sacrifice more than enough.

... የኛ ወንድሞችና አባቶች ስለነፃነታችን ተንገላተዋል ፣ ሞተዋል። 

... Our brothers and fathers suffered and died for our freedom.

እኛም ሰለልጆቻችን ነፃነት በበቂ መጠን ታግለናል። 

And we, for the sake of our children's freedom, struggled enough.

የኛ የምንጊዜም ጥረት እስራቱም ሆነ እንግልቱ በእኛ ትውልድ እንዲያበቃ ነው። 

Our usual effort is to end the imprisonment, the suffering and discomfort in our generation. 

መጪው ትውልድ ዱግም ስለነፃነት እንዲሞትና እንዲሠቃይ አያስፈልግም... እኛም መጪውን ስለነፃነትና ትውልድ ለመታገል ትንሽ ትንሽ እየሞትን ነው... ይህ ዓላማችን በመሳካቱ ደግሞ ደስተኞች ነን።»

There's no need for the coming generation to suffer and die for freedom ... we're dying bit by bit for future freedom and generation ... And we're happy for this has been successful."

ብሏል።

He said.

   ዋና አዘጋጁ የሃገሪቱን ፕሬዘዱንት በቦሌ ቢጫ ታክሲ በመመሰሉና የቀኛዝማቹን ክብር ነክቷል በሚለው ክስ በማዕከላዊ ወንጀል ምርመራ ጽ/ቤት ተገኝቶ ቃሉን ሰጥቶ እና የአስር ሺህ ብር ዋስ ጠርቶ መፈታቱታውቋል።

It was disclosed that the editor-in-chief was released on bail of ten thousand Birr and having give his words at the central investigation office for he used a false analogy of the president of the country as having semblance of the Bole Airport yellow taxis, and dishonored the acting president of AAPO, General Nekatibeb, and similar charges.  

ከፊያሜታ ነሐሴ 19 ቀን 1991

From Fiameta August 25, 1999
