

                በመርሐ ተዋህዶ ጋዜጣ መታገድ የፓትርርያርኩ ወዳጆች ፈንጠዚያ አደረጉ!

The Patriarch's Friends were overjoyed As a result of the Ban of Merha Tewahedo Newspaper!

   በንግድ ሚ/ር ሕጋዊ ፈቃድ አግኝታ «መርሐ ተዋህዶ» በሚል ስያሜ በ15 ቀን አንድ ጊዜ (አርብ) ስትታተም የነበረችው መርሐ ተዋህዶ ጋዜጣ በፌዴራል የመጀመሪያ ደረጃ ፍ/ቤት ትዕዛዝ በመታገድዋ አይንሽን ላፈር የሚሏት የነበሩ የፓትርያርኩ ጀሌዎች ከፍተኛ ፈንጠዚያ ማድረጋቸውን ውስጥ አዋቂ ምንጮች ለዝግጅት ክፍላችን ገለፁ።

The news paper that is published by the name "Merha Tewahedo" and had legal permission from Ministry of Trade and used to come out once in two weeks (on Friday) was banned in an order given from the Federal First Instance Court, and those who were patriarch's combatants and who didn't like the tabloid were overjoyed, internal sources disclosed to us.  

   መርሐ ተዋህዶ ጋዜጣ ስትመሰረት «መርሐ ተዋህዶ» በሚለው ስያሜ እንዳትጠራ ተቃዋሚ ካለ ይቅረብ በማለት በፍ/ቤት ታውጆ በወቅቱ የቀረበ ተቃዋሚ አካል አለመኖሩን የሚገልፁት ወገኖች እንደሚሉት በቤተ ክህነት ቃለ መሃላ ብቻ የጋዜጣዋ ድርጅት ሳይቀርብ (ሳይጠየቅ) መታገዷ አግባብነት የለውም ይላሉ። 

The sides who argue that when Merha Tewahedo newspaper was first established it was officially disclosed that if anyone who's against the name could put the case to the court but none didn't appear then, so it would be inappropriate to ban the newspaper just by the clergy's vow, without the appearance of the owner in the court. 

ስለ ጋዜጣዋ መታገድ ምክንያት የድርጅቱ ባለቤት ፍ/ቤቱ ድረስ በመቅረብ እገዳው እንዲነሳላቸው ጠይቀው እንደነበርና በቤተ ክህነት በኩል በቀረበው ክስ መሰረት ለመጋቢት 16 ቀን 1990 ከተሰጠው ቀነ ቀጠሮ ውጭ እንደማይታይለት ፍ/ቤቱ መግለፁንም ለማወቅ ተችሏል።

Appearing in court the owner of the tabloid asked the court to lift the ban, but he was told that the case wouldn't be seen except on the appointment date given to the clergy on March 24 1998, the court explained.  

በዚህ ዙሪያ የሕግ ሙያተኞችን እንደሚሉት ከሆነ እገዳው አግባብነት እንደሌለው ይናገራሉ። 

In this regard, lawyers claimed that the ban was not proper. 

ስለጋዜጣዋ መታገድ ተከድኖ ይብሰል የሚያሰኝ ምስጢር ሳይኖር እንደማይቀርና ፓትርያርኩም በንዴት ይህችን ጋዜጣ ለማሳገድ ችግሩ ምንድነው? አስፈፃሚ ሰው ነው የጠፋው ወይስ? ይሉ እንደነበር ውስጥ አዋቂዎችን ገልፀው በመታገድዋም ትንሽ እረፍትና መረጋጋት ሳያገኙ እንዳልቀሩ ተናግረዋል።

The real cause for the ban of the tabloid was believed to be mysterious and the patriarch was quoted as saying what the problem to ban this tabloid is? Is it implementer who was missing or? And he's said to have some respite due to the ban, internal sources explained.  

   ጋዜጣው እንድትታገድ ፍ/ቤቱ ቀጥታ ለንግድ ሚ/ር መፃፉንና ለክልል 14 ፖሊስ ኮሚሽን ማሳወቁን የንግድ ሚ/ሩ ደግሞ ለመርሐ ተዋህዶ ድርጅት ማሳወቁን የሚገልፁት ወገኖች እንደሚሉት ስለጋዜጣዋ ያለ አግባብ መታገድ የድርጅቱ ባለቤት ለከፍተኛ ፍ/ቤት የይግባኝ ጥያቄ ሳያቀርብ እንዳልቀረም አስምረውበታል።

The court wrote directly to the ministry of Trade and disclosed to Region 14 Police Commission and, in return, the ministry of Trade made it clear to Merha Tewahedo Organization, the letter was thought to have appealed to higher court, they underscored.  

   የጋዜጣዋ በፓትርያርኩና መሰሎቻቸው ዘንድ መጠላት ዋና ምክንያት የሆነውንም እነዚህ ውስጥ አዋቂ ምንጮች ሲያብራሩ በቤተ ክህነት ውስጥ የሚፈፀመውን የዕለት ዕለት ምስጢር ስለምታጋልጥና አዘጋጆቹም የቤተ ክህነት ሰዎች እንደመሆናቸው መጠን የሚደረጉትን እንቅስቃሴዎች ተከታትሎ ስለሚያጋልጡ ምንም እንኳ «የበሰበሰ ዝናብ አይፈራም» አይነት ነገር ሆኖ በፓትርያርኩ ላይ አዲስ ነገር ባይፈጠርም የጋዜጣዋ በዚህ መቀጠል ቤተ-ክህነትም ሆነ ሰዎቿን ከጊዜ ወደ ጊዜ እርቃናቸውን ስለምታስቀር በለጋነቷ መቅጨቱ አማራጭ የሌለው መፍትሄ ሆኖ ስለቀረበ ሳይሆን እንደማይቀር ተነግሯል።

The cause for the tabloid to be hated among the patriarch and his friends, according to knowledgeable people, was because it exposes the day to day secrets of the clergy and since the editors are also people of the clergy, they have been continually exposing and from time to time would leave the clergy and their people naked, it was a measure to tackle the problem before it's too late, although some argued that "one which is rotten isn't frightened of rain" as the Ethiopian saying goes.  

   በትምህርት ሰጪነቷ የምትታወቀው መርሐ ተዋህዶ ጋዜጣ በጠቃሚ መጣጥፎቿ ተውባና አምራ ሃይማኖታዊ ይዘቷን ተላብሳ በቀነ ቀጠሮ ባለመገኘቷ ድንበኞቿን አሳዝና እነ አባ ጳውሎስን ብታስፈነጥዝም ሕጋዊ ፈቃድ ያላት እንደመሆኗ መጠን ለመጋቢት 16 ቀን 1990 ቀጠሮ ግን ሥራዋን እንደምትቀጥል ሳይፈቀድላት እንደማይቀር ተገምቷል።

It's saddening not to see Merha Tewahedo on her appointment date, which is popular for its educative, important articles colorful and maintaining her religious contents; sorrowful to her customers tough pleasing Aba Paulos and his dears, believed that it would come out on March 26, 1998.

                         ከፊያሜታ የካቲት 18 ቀን 1990

                         From Fiameta February 25, 1998
