

                           አቡነ ጳውሎስ ወደ ትግራይ ተጓዙ!

                          Bishop Paulos Traveled to Tigray!

                           መንገድ ጠራጊው አቡነ ቄርሎስ ናቸው

                       One who paves the way is Bishop Kerlos 

   ከትግራይ ካህናትና ምዕመናን ጋር ከተቆራረጡ ረጅም ጊዜ የሆናቸውና አካባቢውን እንዱይረግጡ ከሆኑም ዓመታት ያለፋቸው አቡነ ጳውሎስ ባለፈው ሳምንት መጨረሻ ላይ ወደ ትግራይ ተጉዘዋል።

Bishop Paulos who has been at logger heads for a long time with Tigrean priests and laity and who hasn't stepped on to the area for years traveled to Tigray at the end of last week.

   ህዝቡ መቀበል አለመቀበላቸውን ለማረጋገጥ መንገድ ጠራጊ በመሆን በመጀመሪያ ወደ ትግራይ የሄዱት አቡነ ቄርሎስ ናቸው። 

In order to know whether the people would accept or not the one who traveled first to Tigray was Bishop Kerlos. 

የሰሜን ሸዋ ሀገረስብከት ሊቀጳጳስ አቡነ ኤፍሬም፣ ሊቀካህናት ብርሃኑ ገ/አማኑኤል፣ ሊቀካህናት ክንፈገብርኤል አልታዬ አቶ ወሰንሰገድ፣ አቶ ተካበ በርሄ እና ሌሎችም የአካባቢው ተወላጆች በመሆን ነበር አቡነ ጳውሎስን በመቅደም ትግራይ ሄደው የአቀባበሉን ፕሮግራም ያመቻቹት ከቤተ-ክህነት የደረሰን ዜና እንዱመለከተው።

Archi bishop Ephrem the head of northern Shoa office of national preaching, Pastor Berhanu Gebre Amanuel, pastor knife Gabriel Altaye, Mr. Wosenseged, Mr. Tekabe berhe and together with others of the surrounding native dwellers facilitated bishop Paulos' travel by going before him, the news that reached us from the clergy pointed out. 

   ከዚያም ለአቡነ ጳውሎስ ጥሪ ተደረጎላቸው በሄዱት ሰዎች አማካኝነት አቡነ ጳውሎስ በበኩላቸው 8 ጳጳሳትን አስከትለው መሄዱቸውን የገለፀው ዜና ከመሄዱቸው ውጭ ከሁለት ዓመታት በላይ ተቋርጦ ስለነበረው የትግራይ ህዝብና የአቡነ ጳውሎስ የወደፊት ግንኙነት ምን እንደሚመስል እስካሁን የታወቀ ነገር የለም ብሏል። 

Then after through the call of individuals who had gone before him, Bishop Paul went there and he on his part was accompanied by 8 bishops, and reported that a part from this nothing has been known as yet as to the discontinued relationship of Tigray people that lasted over two years and the future relationship of Bishop Paulos.

ካህናቱንም ሆነ ህዝቡን ለመከፋፈል ጥረት በመደረግ ላይ እደሆነም አንዱንድ ውስጠ አዋቂዎች ጠቁመዋል። 

Efforts are being made to divide the people and the priests, some internal sources pointed out. 

ፓትርያርኩም እስከ ህዱር 21 ቀን፣ 1992 (አክሱም ጽዮን) ድረስ በዚያው ለመሰንበት እቅድ እንዱላቸው እየተነገረ ነው። 

It's told that the patriarch has a plan to stay there until November 29, 2000, (the date where the Axum Mary church is celebrated). 

የነበረው መቃቃርና ልዩነት ምን ደረጃ ላይ እንደ ደረሰ ዜናውን እስካጠናቀርንበት ሰዓት ድረስ የታወቀ ነገር የለም።

Until this news is ready for print, nothing was known as to what happened to the dissension they had.

ከፊያሜታ ኅዳር 14 ቀን 1992

From Fiameta November 24, 1999
