

                     "የኰተቤ ቅ/ገብሬል የሕንፃ ሥራ አልተቋረጠም" ተባለ!

"The Construction work of Kotebe Saint Gabriel Church has not been Discontinued" It was said

   ቀደም ሲል በፊያሜታ ቁጥር 118 መጋቢት 16/1990 የወጣውንና የሕንፃ ሥራው መቋረጡን ከአካባቢው በደረሰን ዘገባ መሠረት መነሻ በማድረግ በወጣው የሕንፃ ሥራ ተቁርጧል መባል የተነሣ የኰተቤ ቅ/ገብሬል ቤተ ክርስቲያን ሰበካ ጉባኤ ም/ሊቀመንበር የሆኑት ሻለቃ ታደሰ ሰይፉ ለዝግጅት ክፍላችን በላኩት ዘገባ ሕንፃ ሥራው አለመቋረጡን ገለፁ።

In accordance with the information it reached us from the area Earlier in Fiameta No. 118 March 24, 1998 it was stated that the construction work was discontinued but the deputy chairman of the preaching assembly of Kotebe saint Gabriel church, major Tadesse Seifu in report he sent to our office stated that the construction work was not discontinued.  

   እንደዘገባው አገላለፅ ከአሁን በፊት የቀረበው ጽሑፍ በሀገር ሽማግሌዎች እና በካህናቶች በማመካኘት ይጻፉ እንጂ ከ5ሺ የሚበልጠው የአካባቢው ህዝበ ክርስቲያን ጠዋት ማታ እየጐበኘና እርዳታ ከማድረግ አለመቆ ጠቡን ገልጿል። 

According to the statement, although the previous report was presented in the name of priests, more than 5 thousands Christian laity of the area, have been visiting day and night, didn't stop offering help.  

ባለፈው በካህናቶቹ ስም ስለተፃፈውም በአውራጃ ሊቀ ካህናት አማካኝነት ካህናቱ ተጠይቀው እኛ አልፃፍንም የፃፉት በእኛ አመካኝተው ለመጠቀም ከ3 እና 4 የማይበልጡ የሥልጣን ሱሰኞች ናቸው ሲል በሙሉ ድምፅ አስተባብለዋል ሲል ዘግቧል። 

As to the previous report that was written in the name of he priests, the priests were asked whether this was true, by the district head of priests, and responded that they didn't write that report, the one who wrote that report are not more than 3 or 4 people who are addicted to power they unanimously denied, the report stated.  

ካህናቱ የፃፉት እውታነት የሌለው መሆኑንም አስፍሯል።

These priests wrote was far form the truths, the report.  

   "ከዘጠኝ ኰንታል ሐሰት አንድ ግራም እውነት ትከብዳለች" በሚል ርዕስ የማስተባበያ ዝርዝር ዘገባ፣ የሕንፃ ሥራው ከተቋረጠ አንድ ዓመት ሆኖታል ማለታቸውም ፈጽሞ ከእውነት የራቀ ነው። 

Under the title "From nine quintals of fake one gram of truth weighs more", issued a firm denial stating that it's completely far from truth that the construction has been discontinued for a year.  

እስከ ሰኔ ወር 1989 ዓ.ም ሲሠራ ቆይቶ ክረምት በመግባቱ ሐምሌና ነሐሴን እኛም ገንዘብ በማጠራቀም ቆይተን አዲስ የተቋቋመልን የሕንፃ ኮሜቴ ሥራ ውን ቀጥሏል። 

Until winter came in July and August when we stayed for collecting money, the building had been under construction up to June 1997, and after the winter, the newly elected building work committee continued its work.   

አሁንም በሚያስደነቅ ሁኔታ እየተሠራ ነው። 

It's now being under construction amazingly. 

ሥራው የቆመው በአስተዳዳሪውና በም/ሊቀመንበሩ፣ በፀሐፊው ምክንያት ነው መባሉም የስም ማጥፋት ዘመቻ ነው ሲል ዘገባው ቀደም ሲል የፃፉትን ወገኖች ኮንኗቸዋል።

The report which stated that the construction work was discontinued because of the administrator and deputy chairman was just defamatory campaign, condemned those group who wrote the previous report.  

   ከዘገባው ስለ ም/ሊቀመንበሩ ሻለቃ ታደሰም ጥሩ ክርስቲያን ለ46 ዓመታት በሥጋ አምላክ ፀንተው የሚኖሩ ናቸው በማለት አሞግሷቸዋል። 

The report also praised the deputy chairman major Tadesse stating that he has been a good Christian who has remained firm in his faith on the fleshy God.  

የሕንፃውን ሥራ ለእይታ ያበቁ ታታሪ ለመሆናቸው ካህናትና ምዕመናን ያረጋግጡላቸዋል በማለት ዘገባው ስለ ም/ሊ /መንበሩ ጥንካሬ ገልፅዋል።

A man who brought the building into reality, and his dedication can be proved by priests and the laity; they explained the strength of the deputy chairman.  

   ይህ ከ1-5 ቁጥር በመዘርዘር በቤተ ክርስቲያኑ ሕንፃ ሥራ ላይ ችግር እንደሌለና የጠላት ወሬ እንደሆነ የገለፀው ዘገባ፣ እውነትነት የሌለውን ፅሁፍ የሚፅፉት ከአራት ኪሎና ከመርካቶ ከእሪ በከንቱ አካባቢ የሚገኙ የሐሰት ፕሮፓጋንዳ የሚነዙ ናቸው ብሏል። 

The report that detailed its statement form 1-5 stated that there's no problem observed in the construction of the building and the rumor is just the talk of the devil, and those people who wrote fake stories are propagandists form around Arat Kilo, Merkato and Eri Bekentu areas.  

"67.689.32 የቤተ ክርስቲያኑ ገንዘብ ያለባቸውን ሰዎች ስም ዝርዝር ጽፈዋል። 

Lists of people who contributed a total of "67.689.32 Birr to the church was written.  

በራሳቸው ላይ ግን ብዙ የቤተ ክርስቲያን ገንዘብ ተሸክመው ለመግለፅ አልፈለጉም። 

The list didn't show their names although they had contributed a lot of the church.  

ይህ ብቻ አይደለም ወደፊት የሚመረመር ከ300.000.00 (ሦስት መቶ ሺህ) ብር በላይ ታሽጐ ለምርመራ የሚጠበቅ አለ ... ብለው ለገለፁት፣ ምን አልባት እነዚህ እኛን የሚኮንኑ ሰዎች ከዕዳው ውስጥ እውነተኛ አጣሪ ከተገኘ ሳይዘፈቁ እንደማይቀሩ ነው" ሲል የሚፈርዱባቸው እንደሚፈረድባቸው ተችቷል።

As to the claimed 300,000.Birr (three hundred thousand) which was said to be kept for investigation in the future...perhaps these people who condemned us, if truthful investigator is found, would have been in debt", criticized by adding that those who judge others would be judged.  

                           ከፊያሜታ ሚያዝያ 21 ቀን 1990

                           From Fiameta April 29, 1998
