

                            የአዋሳ እስር ቤት ማስታወሻዎች!

                             Notes from Awasa Prison!

                                 (ከዳዊት ከበደ)

                            (From Dawit Kebede) 

  መጋቢት 14 ቀን

   March 23

በደቡብ ኢትዮጵያ ፕሬዚዳንት ጉዳይ የልጃገረድ ጠለፋ ሪፖርት ለዝግጅት ክፍሉ ከቀረበልን ሳምንታት ተቆጠሩ። 

Weeks have passed since a report about the South Ethiopia President's abduction reached our office. 

ከብዙ ስብሰባ እና ጭቅጭቅ በኋላ ዜናው ለህትመት እንዲበቃ ውሳኔ ላይ ደረስኩ። 

After many meetings and arguments I reached a decision to publish the news.  

ከዚያ በፊት ግን ወደ ፕሬዚዳንቱ ቢሮ ደወልኩ። 

But before that I called in the president's office.  

ሁኔታውን ለማጣራት ሳይቻል ቀረ። 

It was not possible to investigate the situation.  

በአዋሳ ነዋሪ ወደ ሆኑ ሰዎች ስለጠለፋው እያደዋወልን ስንጠይቅ ነገሩ በወሬ ደረጃ ሲነገር አመታት መቆጠሩን ብቻ ነገሩን። 

When we called in to some people in Awasa to ask about the abduction, they told us that years have passed since they heard the news years on here say level.  

ከዚህ አልፈን ማጣራት አልተቻለም።

We couldn't go beyond this to investigate the matter.  

ዜናው እንዲሰራ ተፈቀደ።

The news was allowed to be published.  

  መጋቢት 15

  March 24

   "ፕሬዚዳንቱ የ17 ዓመት ልጃገረድ አስጠለፉ የሚለው የዜና ርዕስ ኮምፒዩተር ላይ ተጽፎ እንዳለቀ፣ የኮምፒዩተሩ ባለሙያ ዞር ብሎ ተመለከተኝ። 

As soon as the news title "The President had his people abduct a 17 year old girl for him was written on the monitor of the computer, the computer specialist turned his face and gazed at me.

ከዚያም ፈገግ ብሎ እጁን ዘረጋልኝ። 

Then, smiling, he put forward his hand. 

ለስንብት "በል እንግዲህ ቻው!" አለኝና ተጨባበጥን። 

He said, "OK, good bye" and we shook hands.

ከዚያ በኋላ ዜና ዘገባው በዝርዝር ተፃፈ። 

After that the details of the report were written.  

ነገ ለህዝብ ይቀርባል።

Tomorrow it will be available for the public.  

መጋቢት 16

March 25

የፕሬዚዳንቱ ልጃገረድ የመጥለፍ ዜና ከወጣ ከሰዓታት በኋላ ጋዜጣው ከገበያ ላይ ጠፋ። 

After an hour of the news of the president's abduction, the news paper disappeared from the market.

ከወትሮው በበለጠ ሁኔታ የስልክ መልዕክቶች ወደ ዝግጅት ክፍሉ አንቃጨሉ።

More telephone messages than in the ordinary days started pouring to the office.  

ይሄ ሁሉ ሲሆን በደቡብ ኢትዮጵያ አዋሳ ከተማ የእስር ድግስ ይዘጋጅልኝ ነበር። 

While this was going on, a preparation was underway in Awassa town, southern Ethiopia, to send me to prison. 

እኔን አስረው ወደ አዋሳ እስር ቤት የሚወስዱ ታጣቂዎች የተላኩት ይሄኔ ነው።

It was then that armed forces were sent to my place to put me behind bars in Awasa prisons.  

... በአዋሳ አየር ማረፊያ የሚገኙ ፈጥኖ ደራሽ ታጣቂዎች የአዋሳን እስር ቤት እንዲጠብቁ መመሪያ ተሰጠ። 

...The police armed forces at Awasa air port were assigned to keep an eye on Awasa prison.  

በዚህም መሰረት አንድ ጋንታ ጦር እስር ቤቱን በፈረቃ የመጠበቅ ስራውን ቀጠለ። 

One division army started patrolling the prison in shifts.  

የዚህ ጽሑፍ አቅራቢ በዚህ እስር ቤት ከመቆየቱ በፊት በአዲስ አበባ አሳር መከራውን እየቀመሰ ነበር። 

Before he was arrested in this prison, the writer of this news had undergone suffering in Addis Ababa. 

የማዕከላዊ እና የአዲስ አበባ ፖሊሶችም አጥብቀው ይፈልጉታል። 

Central government and Addis Ababa police were desperately looking for him.  

በዚህ ሁሉ መሃል ነው የደቡብ ታጣ ቂዎች የተሳካለት ጠለፋ ያደረጉት። 

It was in the midst of all these that Southern armed forces conducted a successful abduction. 

ታሪኩም ይህን ይመስል ነበር።

The story goes like this.  

  ሃሙስ መጋቢት 24/90

  Thursday April 2/98

ድንገት ስልክ ተደወለ። 

Suddenly a telephone called.  

ከአዲስ አበባ ፖሊስ ኰሚሽን ቢሮ ነው። 

It was From Addis Ababa Police commission Office.  

ዛሬውኑ ፖሊስ ጣቢያ እንድደርስ ተነገረኝ። 

I was told to reach the police station today.  

በዚህ ዓይነት የጥድፊያ ቀጠሮ ወዴትም መሄድ የለብኝምና በሚመጣው ሳምንት ልመጣ እንደምችል ገልጬለት ስልኩ ተዘጋ።

As soon as I told him I couldn't come with such a hurry notice but I could reach there the next week, the call turned off.  

ከዚያ ደግሞ አንድ ሰዓት ያህል ቆይቶ ስልኩ አንቃጨለ። 

After an hour the telephone rang.  

ከፌዴራሉ ማዕከላዊ ፖሊስ ነው። 

It was from the Federal Central Police.  

መቶ አለቃው ነበር። 

It was the lieutenant.  

አሁኑኑ ጊዜ ሳላጠፋ እንድቀርብ ቀጭን ትዕዛዝ ሰጠኝ።

He have me a hard and fast order to reach there without wasting time.  

   በኔ በኩል የተከሰስኩበት ጉዳይ በርካታ መሆኑን ነግረውኝ ስለነበር... እና ለዚህ ሁሉ ክስ ዋስ ማቅረብ ዛሬውኑ ስለማልችል ሌላ ጊዜ እንድመጣ ጠየኩት። 

Since you told me the charges I was accused of were many,...and since I can't bring bail for all these charges today, I asked him if I could go at another time.  

መቶ አለቃው ግን ዛሬውኑ በአስቸኳይ መጥቼ ቃሌን ከሰጠሁ በኋላ ሌላ ቀን ዋስ እንደምጠራ ገልጾልኝ ስልኩ ተዘጋ። 

But after the lieutenant insistently told me that I should come immediately and report and only after that I would call my guarantor, the telephone hang. 

እኔም አስቸኳይ ጉዞ አደረኩ፣ ወደ ማዕከላዊ ፖሊስ።

And I started my immediate journey; to the Central Police.  

እዚያ ስደርስ ስብሰባ ላይ ናቸው። 

When I reached there they were in a meeting.  

ከ30 ደቂቃ በላይ ቁጭ ማለት ነበረብኝና ተቀመጥኩ። 

I had to stay for more than 30 minutes and I did. 

ቆይቶ ደግሞ መርማሪ ፖሊስ ተመድቦልኝ ቃሌን የመስጠት ግዴታዬን ተወጣሁ። 

Later I was given an investigator police and gave my words.  

ሆኖም መቶ አለቃው ቃል እንደገባልኝ ሳይሆን ቢያንስ አንድ ዋስ ጠርቼ እንድወጣ፣ አሽራም እንድሰጥ ተደረገ።

However, unlike the lieutenant's promise, I was obliged to go bail at least calling one guarantor, and give fingerprints.  

በመጨረሻም የማዕከላዊ ፖሊስ ዋና ኃላፊ ቢሮው እንድመጣ የስልክ ትዕዛዝ ሰጥቶ ክፉና ደግ ተነጋገርን።

Lastly, the head of the Central Police Force gave an order on the telephone that I should come to his office.  

ከማዕከላዊ ፖሊስ የተነሳሁ ፒያሳ አካባቢ ስደርስ በርካታ ጋዜጠኞች አገኘሁ። 

Starting from around the Central Police up to piazza area I met many journalists. 

በሰላም የመውጣቴ ነገር ደስ አሰኝቷቸው ነበር። 

They were pleased to see me out of the station peacefully.  

ጀንበር እስክታዘቀዝቅ ድረስ አብረን ቆየን።

We stayed together until its dusk.

   ከእነሱ ተለይቼ በምሽት ጨረቃ ወደ ቤቴ ስሄድ ከከፍተኛው ባለስልጣን ጋር ያደረኩት ንግግር ጆሮዬ ላይ ያንቃጭል ነበር። 

When I went home, having departed from my friends, in the moon light the conversation I had with top official was reverberating. 

"መጥፋት ካለብህ ትጠፋለህ ..." አፌን ሞልቼ "አትችልም!" ብለውም ልቤ መደንገጡ አልቀረም። 
"If you must disappear you will..." Even if I said to him "you can't" I was shocked.  

እርግጥ ነው፣ መሞት ካለብኝ እሞታለሁ። ክብር የሌለው የውሻ ሞት ልሞት ግን አይገባኝም።

Of course, if I must die, I will.  However, I can't die a cowardly death.  

እቤት ስገባ ሁኔታዎች መልካቸውን እንደቀየሩ ገባኝ። 

When I got home, I understood that situations were different.  

ዛሬ እግሬ ከቤት ከመውጣቱ ፖሊሶች እኔን ፍለጋ በሚል ምክንያት ወደ ቤት ውስጥ ገብተው ፍተሻ ማድረጋቸው ተነገረኝ። 

I was told that as soon as my leg stepped out, the police came home and ransacked my house. 

እንዴት ሊሆን ይችላል? ቅንጅትና ቅን ብሩ ለጊዜው የማይፈታ እንቆቅልሽ ሆነብኝ።

How could it be? The integration and coordination became a puzzle to me for a while.  

አርብ መጋቢት 25

Friday April 3

ቢሮ ለመግባት ፋታ አላገኘሁም። 

I didn't get time to get into my office.  

ማታ ከሁለቱ የጣሊያን ሴቶች ጋር ነበርኩ። 

I was with the two Italian ladies in the evening.  

ሰዓሊው ጓደኛዬ ከእኔ ጋር ነበር። 

My friend, the artist, was with me. 

አስተዋወኳቸው፣ አብረን አመሸን።

I introduced them, we spent the evening together.  

ማታ ወደ እቤት ስመጣ ሁለት ባትሪ የያዙ ሰዎች ከፊት ከፊቴ ሲመጡ አየሁ። 

I saw people holding two torches coming in front of me.  

አጠገቤ ደርሰው ሁሉንም ነገር ገለፁልኝ።

They came closer to me and told me the whole things.  

ዛሬ ደግሞ አካባቢው በፖሊስ መኪና፣ በታጠቁና ሲቪል በለበሱ ሰዎች ጭምር ተከቦ እኔ ስታሰስ ቆየሁ። 

And today the area was surrounded by police cars, armed people and civilians and I was being looked for.  

እንደገና እቤት ድረስ ገብተው ፍተሻ አደረጉ። 

They got in to the house again and ransacked .  

ይህን ከሰማሁ በኋላ ለሊቱን እንቅልፍ መተኛት አቃተኝ።

After I heard that I couldn't sleep in the night.  

ቀጥሎ ወደውጭ አገር ደወልኩ። 

Next I called overseas.  

እየተደረገ ያለውን ሁሉ ገልጬላቸው ስንብት ፈፀምን። 

I told them about what's happening and departed.  

ለሚቀጥለው ረቡዕ የመጨረሻ እትም የሚሆኑ ስራዎች ሳዘጋጅ ቆይቼ ትንሽ አረፍ አልኩኝ።

Having prepared for the next Wednesday last edition, I took some rest. 

  ቅዳሜ መጋቢት 26

  Saturday April 4

ገና ሰማይና ምድር አልተላቀቀም። 

The night hasn't yet given way to the day.  

ከቤት ወጥቼ ግራና ቀኝ ስመለከት ሲቪል የለበሱ ፀጉረ ልውጥ ሰዎች በአካባቢው አየሁ። 

When I went out of my house and looked around, I saw strange civilians in the area.  

የሰጋሁት አልቀረም። 

What I feared happened.  

ከ5 ደቂቃ በኋላ ለጊዜው እኔ በማላውቀው ጉዳይ በኃይል ተቆጣጠ ሩኝ። 

After 5 minutes they controlled me with a force I couldn't tell at present.  
"ፖሊስ 196" በምትለው አረንጓዴ መኪና ይዘውኝ ሸመጠጡ።

They took me with a green car that says "police 196" and drove fast.

ይሄኛው አዳኝ ወይም አፋኝ ቡድን ከደቡብ ኢትዮጵያ ተልኰ የመጣ ነበር። 

This one was a search or kidnap group that was sent from southern Ethiopia.  

ሁኔታው አግባብ ባይሆንም የአፈናው ተግባር ተፈፅሞ ወደ ደቡብ ኢትዮጵያ ርዕሰ ከተማ፣ አዋሳ ጉዞ ቀጠልን። 
Although the act was not appropriate, the task of kidnapping was conducted and continued our way to the capital of southern Ethiopia, Awasa.  

ወላጅ አባቴ እስከ ሻሸመኔ ድረስ ከፖሊሶቹ እና ከኔ ጋር አብሮኝ ነበር ያለው። 

My biological father was with me and the police officers until shashemene town.  

ከሻሸመኔ በኋላ ግን አብረን አልዘለቅንም።

But we didn't go together from shashemene onwards.  

ከአዲስ አበባ 275 ኪሎሜትር ርቀት ላይ ወዳለችው አዋሳ ከተማ ለመግባት ጥቂት ደቂቃዎች ከፊታችን አሉ። 

We have few minutes remaining before reaching Awasa, a city which is situated 275 kilometers from Addis Ababa. 

ጠዋት የጀመርነው ጉዞ የአዲስ አበባንና የኦሮሚያን ክልሎችን በማገባደድ ጥቁር ውሃ ላይ ደረሰ።

The journey which we stated in the morning was completed after going through the Addis Ababa and Oromia regions then to black water.  

ይሄ ጥቁር ውሃ የኦሮሚያንና የደቡብ ሕዝቦችን የሚከልል ወይም የሚለይ የተፈጥሮ ድንበር ነው። 

This Black Water is a natural border line that separates Oromia from Southern region.  

ውሃው በተፈጥሮው ጥቁር ሲሆን፣ ፀሐይ ልትጠልቅ ስትል በላዩ ላይ የምታንፀባርቀው ቀይ ብርሃን ወንዙን የረጋ ደም ያስመስለዋል። 

While the water is naturally black, reflection of light of the sun set of the water given the river a resemblance of blood color.

እየተንከባለለ የሚወርድ ጥቁር ውሃ - - ጥቁር ደም የመሰለ።

A flowing black river resembling - - black blood.  

ጥቁር ውሃን ተሻግረን አዋሳ ስንገባ ለፖሊሶቹ የእንኳን ደህና መጣችሁ አቀባበል ተደረገላቸው። 

When we reached Awasa crossing black river, the police were welcomed.  

የደቡብ ኢትዮጵያ ፍትህ ቢሮ ኃላፊ አቶ ዘሪሁን ስብሰባውን አቋርጦ እኔ ዘንድ መጣ። 

The southern Ethiopia Justice Office Head Mr. Zerihun came to me adjourning his meeting.  

ወጣት ነው። 

He is young.  

ዓይኑ ውስጥ ግን ብልጣ ብልጥነት ይነበባል። 

But you can read shrewdness in his eyes.  

ሁሉንም ሁኔታ ነገረኝ። 

He told me about all the situations.  

በተለይ የደቡብ ክልል ፕሬዚዳንት የጠለፏት ልጃገረድ ታሪክ አሳስቦታል፣ ለዚህም ነበር እኔ ከአዲስ አበባ የተጠለፍኩት(?) ድርጊቱ ፍፁም ከህግ አግባብ ውጪ ቢሆንም ማድረግ የምችለው ነገር የለም፣ ከጥንቃቄ በስተቀር።

Especially he's concerned about the air line who was abducted by the president of southern Region, that's why I was abducted (?) from Addis Ababa; although the committed act was unjustified, there was nothing I could do, except being cautioned.   

እኔ ወደ ፖሊስ መምሪያ ውስጥ ወደ ሚገኘው እስር ቤት ከመግባቴ በፊት በእስር ቤቶቹ ብረት ፍርግርግ ውስጥ እጃቸው በካቴና የታሰረና ሌሎችንም እስረኞች እያየሁና እያዩኝ ወደ ተዘጋጀው እስር ቤት ገባሁ። 

Before I was arrested in the prison which is found in the police department, I saw people whose hands were tied in chains behind bars and they also saw me entering my room.  

በዚህ እስር ቤት ውስጥ ሁለት የፖሊስ መኮንኖች ታስረዋል፣ ተቀብለው አስተናገዱኝ።

Two policemen were arrested in this prison, gave me a welcoming reception.   

   የፍትህ ቢሮ ኃላፊው እንደገና መጥቶ፣ ሁለቱ መኮንኖች እንዲወጡ ተደርጐ እስር ቤት ውስጥ ቁጭ ብሎ፣ እኔም ቁጭ ብዬ ስለታሰርኩበትና መሰል ጉዳዮች ብዙ አወራን። 

But when the Justice Berau Head came again to the cell where I was put, the two policemen went out, we talked about the reasons I was arrested, and related issues.  

በምንግባባበት ተግባባን። 

Where we can agree, we agreed.  

በሌላው ግን ልንግባባ ቀርቶ... እኔ የምለው አይገባውም፣ እሱ የሚለኝም አይገባኝ ጀመር።

But with the rest leave alone to agree ... what I said to him didn't give him sense; what he said to me didn't give me sense.  

ለሊቱን ከመኰንኖቹ ጋር እራት ቀመስኩ። 

(In the Evening) I ate dinner with the police officers.  

ሁለቱ የፖሊስ መኰንኖች በደቡብ ኢትዮጵያ ከፍተኛ ስልጣን የነበራቸውና ከዚህ ተዛውረው ሌላ ሥራ ላይ ቆይተው ሳለ ለጥያቄ ትፈለጋላችሁ ተብለው ነው የታሰሩት። 

The two police officers had high positions in southern Ethiopia, but later were transferred to some other work, until they were called for question and put behind bars.  

ከእነዚህ መኰንኖች ስለከተማውና ነዋሪው፣ ግንዛቤ አገኘሁ።

I was aware of the people and the town through these police officers.  

እንግዲህ እስርን በደቡብ ኢትዮጵያ ውስጥ ሆኜ ሳልወድ ልቀበለው ሆነ። 

I was forced to accept imprisonment in southern Ethiopia.  

የፕሬዚዳንቱን ልጃገረድ መጥለፍ ወይም ሌላውን ሚስጥር የነገረህን ካልነገርከን አንፈታህም፣ አንለቅህም፣ ተብሎ በግልፅ ተነግሮኛል።

I was told in black and white that unless you told us about the abduction of the president's girl or the person who told you other secrets, we won't release, you we won't leave you. 

እኔም ተባባሪ እንደማልሆን ገልጫለሁ። 

And I told them I won't be cooperative.  

እንኳንስ አስገድደውኝ ቀርቶ ለምነውኝም በሆነላቸው። 

They can't get (what they went) through polite questioning, leave alone through forceful means.  

ታይቶ የማይታወቅ የድፍረት ጥያቄ ነው የሆነብኝ።

It was a question unheard of and I thought how dare he asked me like this.  

እሁድ መጋቢት 27/90

Sunday April 5/98

እሁድ በጠዋት የፍትህ ቢሮ ኃላፊው መጥቶ የሰለቸኝን ጭቅጭቅ አመጣብኝ። 

The head of justice Bureau came Sunday morning and started the usual tedious nag.  

ነገረኝ - ነገርኩት- ... ከዚያ በኋላ ሄደ። 

He shouted at me I talked back to him...after that he left.  

እሱ ከሄደ በኋላ እስረኛው ሆነ ተረኛው ብዙ ያወራል፣ ያወራሉ። 

After he left the each prisoner as well as the shift worker was talking; they all were talking. 

ደግነቱ ይህን ሁሉ አይሰማምና እድለኛ ነው።

Fortunately, he wouldn't hear to all of these and hence, he is lucky.  

ዛሬ የፅዳት ቀን ከመሆኑም በላይ የእስረኛ ቤተሰቦች ይመጣሉ። 

Apart from being a day for cleaning today families will come.  

እኔን ከአዲስ አበባ ድረስ መጥቶ ማንም ሊጠይቀኝ አይችልም። 

Nobody could come from Addis Ababa to visit me.  

ከአዋሳ በጥቂት ኪ.ሜ ርቀት ላይ ካለችው ከተማ እኔን ለመጠየቅ የመጣው የእህቴን ባለቤት እንዳናግረው አልተፈቀደልኝም። 

I was not allowed to talk to my brother-in-low who came from a town few kilometers far from Awasa. 

ከማንም ጠያቂ ጋር እንዳልገናኝ ትዕዛዝ መሰጠቱን ያወቅኩት ዘግይቼ ነው። 
It was only later that I knew I was not allowed to meet any visitor.  

ትዕዛዙን የሰጠውም ልጅ እግሩ የፍትህ ኃላፊ ዘሪሁን ነበር።

The order was given by the young head of Justice Bureau, Zerihun.  

ሰኞ መጋቢት 28

Monday April 6

ዘሪሁን የተባለው በጠዋት ቢሮው አስጠ ራኝ። 

I was called to come to Zerihun's office.  

ትልቅ የተንጣለለ ቢሮ ባለ አበባ ስጋጃ የተነጠፈበት ነው። 

It was a big spacious room the floor of which was covered by a flower-paint rug.  

ከተለመደው ውጭ ያመጣው ነገር የለም። 

He didn't take up an issue out of the ordinary.  

ሆኖም የአሁን አነጋገሩ የወዳጅነት ሳይሆን የአለቃነት ወይም የባለ ስልጣን ዓይነት በመሆኑ ጩኸትና ቁጣ የተቀላቀለበት ነበር።

Yet, his present speech was not that of a friend, but of a boss or in authority and, therefore it was mixed with anger and yell.  

"አሁን አንተ ጋዜጠኛ ነኝ ትላለህ?" አለኝ። 

"Do you say you are a journalist?" he asked me.

"አንተም የፍትህ ሰው ነኝ፣ብለህ እኔን በግፍ አስረሃል" እለዋለሁ። 
"You too claim you're a man of justice and yet put me behind bars without any change" he said. 

ሌላም ሌላም።

And so on.

"ቆይ ግን ጋዜጣው ላይ ሰው ሞቷል ግድያ ተፈፅሟል ብለህ ያልከው የት ያየኸውን ነው?" ይላል በቁጣ።

You wrote in your tabloid a person was killed, but where did you see this happened?" asked in vexation.  

   "ለሱ መረጃነት እሩቅ አልወስድህም፣ እዚሁ እስር ቤት እናትና አባቱ ተገድለው፣ እሱን በካቴና አስራችሁ ያላችሁት እስረኛን መጥቀስ ብቻ ይበቃል" እለዋለሁ፣ እንጨቃጨቃለን። 

"To show you evidence I won't take you farther; it would be sufficient to mention a prisoner in chain whom you arrested after you killed his father and mother in this jail," I said, we argued.  

በጣም ብዙ።

For long.

   ለሰዓታት ያህል የቆየሁበትን ጭቅጭቅ ሁሉ ለመግለፅ ባልችልም በመጨረሻ ወደ ህግ አማካሪዬ እንድደውል ፈቅዶልኝ አዲስ አበባ ደወልኩ።

While I couldn't express the whole argument I had with him for hours, he finally allowed me to call to my lawyer counselor in Addis Ababa.  

እኔ ከሱ ቢሮ ስወጣ ለመርማሪው ፖሊስ ኃላፊ ትዕዛዝ ሰጠው። 

When I went out from his office he gave an order to the police.  

ብቻዬን እስር ቤት ውስጥ እንድሆንና መኰንኖቹ ሌላ ቦታ እንዲሄዱ ትዕዛዝ ሰጠ። 

That I should stay alone in the cell, and to move the officers to another place.  

እንዳለውም ሆነ። 

And it was so as he said. 

ብቻዬን ቀረሁ።

I remained alone.  

ከሰዓት በኋላ ፍ/ቤት በመኪና ወሰዱኝ። 

In the afternoon they took me to the court.  

ግርግርና ወረፋ የለም። 

This was no confusion and queue.  

ጊዜ ቀጠሮ ተጠይቆብኝ ከመመለሴ በፊት ለዳኛው ማለት ያለብኝን አልኩት።

Before I was given another appointment date, I had said what I needed to say to the judge. 

   ከአዲስ አበባ እንዴት ባለ ሁኔታ ታፍኜ እንደመጣሁና አሁን ስለተከሰስኩበት ወንጀል በጠቅላይ አቃቤ ሕግ በኩል ተከስሼ ቃሌን አዲስ አበባ ማዕከላዊ ፖሊስ ቢሮ መስጠቴን፣ዋስ ጠርቼም የወጣሁ መሆኔን ገለፅኩ። 

How I had been kidnapped and arrived we from Addis Ababa, and about the criminal charges filed against me, how through the office of Prosecutor General, I gave my words to the Addis Ababa Central Police Office and how I went out on bail.  

በአንድ ወንጀል ሁለት ጊዜ ልከሰስ፣ሁለት ጊዜ ቃሌን ልሰጥና ለሁለተኛ ጊዜም ዋስ መጥራት ከህግ አግባብ ውጪ በመሆኑ እንደማልተባበር ተናገርኩ። 

I told him that I cannot be accused twice with one charge, give my words and calling a guarantor twice was out of the legal enactment, and hence, I wouldn't cooperate.  

ቢሆንም ፍ/ቤቱ ለሚያዚያ 5 ቀን ምርመራው ተጠናቆ እንድቀርብ አዘዘ።

Nevertheless, the court ordered me to appear on April 13 after completion of the investigation.   

ከፍርድ ቤት ከወጣሁ በኋላ ወደ ፖሊስ መምሪያው ተወሰድኩ። 

I was taken to the police after Department I had gone out from the court.  

እዚያም የፖሊስ ም/ኮ ሚሽነሩ ጋር በኔ ጉዳይ ተነጋገርን። 

There I talked with the deputy police commissioner about my case.  

በውይይታችንም መጨረሻ ለህይወቴ እንደምስጋና ለሊት ሲሆን ማንም ወደኔ እንዳይመጣ፣ ቢመጣም ወደ ክፍሌ እንዳይገባ ትዕዛዝ እንዲሰጥልኝ በጠየቅኩት መሰረት፣ ምንም አይነት ነገር እንደማይደርስብኝ ቃል ተገብቶልኝ ወደ እስር ክፍሌ አመራሁ። 

At the end of our discussion, he promised according to my request that no one should come to me, and even if one comes to me one is not allowed to enter my class for which I considered it as a peace of mind.  

ቢሆንም በእስር የመቆየቴ ነገር እውን ሆነ።

Yet, my staying behind bars has become inevitable.  

ጀንበር ወደ ምዕራብ ማቆልቆል ስትጀምር የፍትህ ቢሮው ኃላፊ መጣ። 

When the sun was about to set, Head of Justice Bureau came.  

ፍ/ቤት የተናገርኩትን ጨምሬ ሌላም አልኩት። 

Including what I had said to the court, I told him many things.  

በእስርና በማንገላታት ምንም ውጤት እንደማያመጡና ይልቁንም እኔ ከህግ አግባብ ውጪ እንደማልተባበር፣ ወደፊት ለሚሆነውም ሁሉ ከተጠያ ቂነት እንደማይድን ከንዴት ጋር ተናገርኩ። 

I told him filled with fury with arrest and persecution their won't yield any result, and I wouldn't cooperate with illegal enactment and he wouldn't escape from being accountable in the future. 

የዛሬው ቀን ከኔ ብስጭት ጋር ተዳምሮ ደስ የሚል ስሜት አልሰጥህ አለኝ። 

Together with my rage, the day couldn't make me feel OK.   

ለሊት ላይ ግን የተስፋ ህልም አየሁ።

But at night I saw a dream filled with hope.  

   ከድሮም ጀምሮ በህልሜ ወይ ባቡር አልያም አውሮኘላን ወይም መኪና ሲያመልጠኝ ካየሁ በዚያን ሰሞን የጀመርኩት ነገር አልሳካ ይለኛል። 

Since long ago whenever I saw, that in my dream, I missed a train or airplane or car, the plan I had set out then wouldn't be successful; it's assign of a bad omen.     

ዛሬ ለሊት ደግሞ አዲስ አበባ ውስጥ አንድ የማላውቀው ቀውጢ ጉዳይ ተፈጥሮ የምሳፈርበት መኪና አጥቼ ስዳክር አንዲት ታክሲ ከአፍ እስከ ገደፏ ሞልታ መጣች። 

Today at night I saw that there was something terrible happening in Addis, and I was in search of a taxi; one taxi came filled up to the brim with people.   

ብዙ ከሮጥኩ በኋላ ታክሲዋ ቆማ ተጨናንቄ ተሳፈርኩ። 

After I ran some distance, the taxi stopped and I boarded in with difficulty.  

እነሆ የሚቀጥሉት ቀናት ብሩህና የተስፋ እለቶች ሆነው እንደሚቆዩ አሰብኩ። 

Therefore, I assumed the coming days to be bright and full of hope.  

በህልም መሰል ጉዳዮች ብዙ ሰዎች ጠንካራ እምነት የላቸውም። 

Many People do not have strong faith in dreams and the like.  

ምንም ተስፋ በሌለበት እስር ቤት ውስጥ መልካም ህልም ማየትም አንድ ቁምነገር ነው።

However, it is something important to see good dreams in a prison where that there's no hope.  

ማክሰኞ መጋቢት 29

Tuesday April 7

ዛሬ የሙስሊሞች የአረፋ በዓል፣ ለክርስቲያኖችም የሆሳዕና እለት ነው። 

Today it's Id-Al Adha (Arafa) for Muslims and Hosana for Christians.   

ለኔም የተስፋ ቀን።

And a day of hope for me.  

የምሽት ፀሐይ ወደቤቷ ልትገባ ግድም እኔ በእስር ክፍሌ መስኮት ወደ ውጭ እያየሁ ነበር። 

When the sun was about to set, I was looking out of the window from my prison cell.  

ከዛፎቹ ባሻገር በፖሊስ መም ሪያው ውስጥ የሚተራመሱት የፖሊስ መኪኖች እና ልዩ ልዩ ሰዎች በኔ ውስጥ ትርጉም ያለው ስፍራ አላቸው። 

Excepting the trees, the cars and different people that move here and these, have special meaning for me.  

እስረኛ ሆኖ ከነፃነት ውጪ መቆየትና በነፃነት መንቀሳቀስ ፍፁም የተለያዩ ነገሮች ናቸው። 

To be a prisoner and stay out of freedom and moving freely are two different things.  

እናም ከእስር ቤት ማዶ ያለው ህይወት ያጓጓል። 

And, therefore, the life beyond prison is tempting.  

እንዲህ ወደ ውጭ እያየሁ እያለ የተለመደችው የኃላፊው መኪና መጣች። 

While I was looking outside the prison all the usual car of the head of the office came.  

የውጪውን አየር በነፃነት ይስብ የነበረው እስረኛ እርጋታና ችኮላ በተቀላቀለበት ሁኔታ ወደ እስር
ክፍሉ ገባ። 

The prisoner who was breathing the outside air freely entered his room with a mixed condition of stability and hurry.  

ኃላፊው ስለመጣ። 

Because the head came.  

እኔም ገርበብ ብሎ የተከፈተውን በር ዘግቼ እንደገና በመስኮቴ ላይ ሆንኩና ከማዶ የሚመጣውን ኃላፊ እጠብቅ ጀመር።

Closing the door which was ajar, I went to my window waiting for the head of the office that was coming from afar.  

ከኃላፊው ጋር ሰላምታ ከተለዋወጥን በኋላ ለተወሰኑ አፍታዎች ዝም አልን። 

After exchanged greetings with the head we kept quiet for a certain time.  

"ምን አዲስ ነገር አለ?" ብዬ ዝምታውን ሰበርኩ።

"What's up?" I said breaking the ice.   

"ምንም አዲስ ነገር የለም። 

"Nothing."  

ባንተስ በኩል ሃሳብህን አልቀየርክም?"

"How about you, didn't you charge your mind?"

"አልቀየርኩም!"

"No, I didn't"

"እነማን ይህን ሚስጥር እንዳቀበሉህ አትገልጽም?"

"Don't you tell who handover you this secret?"

"በመጀመሪያ ደረጃ የፕሬስ ህጉ የዜና ምንጩን እንኳንስ ለፖሊስ ለፍ/ቤት እንዳሳውቅ አያስገድደኝም። 

"First of all the press law doesn't oblige me to tell the source of the news even to the court leave alone to the police.  

አንተም በማሰር ምንም አታገኝም።"

And you don't get any thing by putting behind bars."

"How?"

"እንዴት?"

"ይልቅ የማይነካካ ነገር ነካክተህ ጉዳዩን ይብስ መጥፎ ደረጃ ባታደርሰው ይሻላል። 

"You'd rather not touch the untouchable and aggravate the issue.  

አንተ ጉድጓድ ስትቆፍርልኝ እኔም ሰው ነኝና ላንተም መቆፈሬ አይቀርም። 

When you dig a hole for me I'd the same for you for I'm also human.  

ሥልጣንህን ያለ አግባብ በመጠቀምህ ልትጠየቅ ይገባል። 

You are accountable for improperly using your authority. 

ይሄ ባይሆን እንኳ በተቆፈረው ጉድጓድ ብቻዬን አልገባበትም። 

If that was not the case I wouldn't get in to the ditch alone.   

ይሄን እወቅ።

Just know this.  

አልኩት። 

I said.  

እውነቴን ነበር።

I was right.  

ምንም የተቆፈረ ጉድጓድ እንደሌለ ከገለፀልኝ በኋላ እነዚያን ተስፋ አስቆራጭ ቃላት አመጣቸው። 

After he explained to me there was no pitch that was dug, he brought up those discouraging words. 

"እንግዲህ እንደወፍ በረህ አትሄድም። 

"Then you won't fly and go like a bird.  

ሚስጥሩን እስካላወጣህ ድረስ ጋዝ ጋዝ እስኪልህ ትታሰራለህ።" 

Until you reveal the secrets, you'll remain behind bars, up to the time you're fed up.  

አለኝ። 

He said to me.  

ሁኔታው እያሳቀኝ ስለመጣ ነገሩን ወደ ቀልድ መውሰድ ጀመርኩ።

Since the conversation started to make me laugh, I took it into some kind of joke.

"ስማ እንጂ!" አልኩት።

"Hey listen!" I said.

"እሺ?"

"OK?"

"ነገሩን ለምን በሌላ መልኩ አናየውም። 

"Let's see it differently.  

ለምሳሌ ወንጀሉ በፕሬዚዳንቱና በተከታዮቹ ተፈፅሟል ተብሎ፣ እኔም ፅፌዋለሁ። 

For instance, I wrote too that the crime was committed by the president and his followers.  

ይሄ እንዳለ ሆኖ እንደ ህግ አዋቂነትህ ለምን እነሱ እንዲጠየቁ አታደርግም?" አልኩት። 

This as it is as a professional lawyer why don't you ask them to be requested?" I asked.  

ይሄን ሁሉ ስናገር ፊቴን ወደ ፀሐይ መግቢያ አድርጌ ነበርና በፊቱ ላይ ምን እንደሚነበብ ለማወቅ አልቻልኩም። 
I couldn't see his facial expression for my eyes traveled to the sun set while I was talking to him. 

ትክ ብሎ ይመለከተኝ እንደነበር ግን እገምታለሁ።

But I presume he was looking in to my eyes.  

ብዙ ክፉና ደግ ካወራን በኋላ "ድፍረትህን አደንቃለሁ" አለኝ፣ሽሙጥ ይሁን ምን ባይገባኝም የአመለካከት ለውጥ ማምጣቱን ጠርጥሬያለሁ።

After having talked good and bad, he said "I appreciate your courage"; said out of sarcasm or not, I suspected that he had a shift of attitude.  

ቢሆንም ግን አብሽቅ ሰው ነው። 

Yet, he was annoying.  

ሰሞኑን በኔ ጉዳይ ስለወጡት ጋዜጦች እያነሳ "እንግዲህ የአዲስ አበባ ጋዜጠኞች በሄሊኮፕተር መጥተው፣ በፓራሹት ወርደው ሲያወጡህ እናያለን።" 

Mentioning about the tabloids that came out with issues pertaining to me these days, he said "We will see the Addis Ababa journalists take you out from here coming by helicopter landing by parachute.  

እያለ አብሽቆኝ መሄዱ የተለመደ ነበር።

It was usual him to annoy me like that.  

ረቡዕ መጋቢት 30

Wednesday April 8

ከኃላፊው ቢሮ ተጠርቼ ገባሁ። 

I was called and entered the lead of the bureau's office.  

የዕለቱ ጋዜጦች ከኔ መታሰር ጋር በተያያዘ ያወጡትን ዜናዎች ያነበብኩትና ያነበበው እዚያው ቢሮ ውስጥ ሆነን ነበር። 

He and I read that day's newspapers that wrote about news related to me in that office.  

የማይነካካውን ነካክቶ ሁኔታዎች ፈር እየለቀቁ መምጣታቸውን ሳይገነዘብ አልቀረም።

He seemed to have realized that his act of touching the untouchables have now made situations worse.  

"ሌላስ ምን ይባላል?" አለኝ።

"Is there any related news?" he asked me.

"ፕሬዚዳንቱ መጀመሪያ ልጃገረድ፣አሁን ደግሞ ጋዜጠኛ አስጠለፉ፣ ይባላል" አልኩት። 

"The president at first had his girl abducted, now had a journalist abducted" I said to him. 

መልሴ እንደማሳቅም እንደማናደድም ሳያደርገው አልቀረም።

My response seemed to have vexed him as well as made him laugh.  

   የዚያኑ ቀን መጀመሪያ ከኔ ጋር የነበሩት መኮንኖች ተጠርተው ምን እንደተባሉ አላው ቅም ... "ይፈሩኝ" ወይም ከኔ ጋር ላለመታየት ወይም ላለማውራት ይጥሩ ጀመር። 

The officers who were at first with me were called but I didn't know what they were told ... whether it was from "shying away" or some other reasons they attempted not to be seen with or talking to me.  

ሁኔታው አስቂኝ ነበር። 

The situation was funny.  

ሊያወሩኝ ቀርቶ አብረውኝ ከሆኑ ሊረሸኑ ጭምር እንደሚችሉ በፍርሃትና በቀልድ ገለፁልኝ። 

They told me with fear and jokingly that they could be persecuted if they were seen together with me, let alone conversing. 

ሰላምታ እንኳ መለዋወጥ አልተቻለም። 

Even exchanging greeting was not possible. 

የዚያን ቀን ያመጣሁትን ጋዜጣ እንኳንስ ሊያነቡት ቀርቶ ርዕሱንም ያዩት አይመስለኝም። 

I don't think they saw even the title of the newspaper which I brought that day let alone reading the news.  

ምን ብለው እንዳስፈራሯቸው እግዜር ይወቀው።

God knows what they did to them to have been fearful.  

   ማታ ላይ ደግሞ የተንቀለቀሉ ተረኛ ጠባቂዎች (ታጋዮች) ጋዜጣውን ተቀብለው ስለኔ መታሰር ካነበቡ በኋላ የጋዜጣው ይዘት ፖለቲካ መሆኑን ሲያውቁ እንደሎጥ ሚስት ደርቀው መቅረት ጀመሩ። 

In the evening, the over-hasty security guards (comrades) took the newspaper from me and they read about my imprisonment there, and when they realized that they were reading politics, they stood dried like lot's wife.  

የዚያኑ ምሽት በጠርናፊው አማካኝነት አስቸኳይ ጥሪ ተደርጐ በግምገማ አሳራቸውን አዩ። 

That same night an urgent call was made to them and underwent evaluation or criticism.  

እንኳንስ ጋዜጣውን ያነበቡ ቀርቶ ቡና ከቴርሙስ ቀድቼ የሰጠኋቸው ሳይቀሩ በደረቁ ሲገመገሙ እኔ ክፍል ድረስ ይሰማኝ ነበር። 

I could hear from my room the criticism leveled at even those guards whom I gave coffee from the thermos bottle.  

በተለይ አንደኛው ላይ ተረባረቡበት። 

Especially they were harshly criticizing him.  

"ጉድህ ፈልቷል!" አሉት። 

"You never know what unusual measures would be taken against you for doing so!" They told him. 

ብቻዬን መሳቅ ጀመርኩ።

I started laughing alone.  

በእርግጥም ጉዱ ፈልቷል።

And indeed, no one knows what kind of strange measures would be taken against him.  

ሐሙስ፦ ጠዋት ፊቴን ለመታጠብ ብቻዬን ታጅቤ ሄድኩ። 

Thursday: - I was accompanied to wash my face.  

እንዲህ ለብቻ ስንሆን ታጋዮቹ የልባቸውን ያወረኛል።

The comrades used to talk to me freely when we were alone like that moment.  

ዛሬ ከሰዓት

Today Afternoon

ወደ አዲስ አበባ ለመሄድ በብዙ ጉዳዮች መደራደር ነበረብኝ። 

I had to negotiate about so many issues.  

አንደኛው ጉዳይ በጋዜጣው ላይ ማስተባበያ ማውጣት ሲሆን፣ ሌሎቹን ጉዳዮች ለጊዜው ከመግለፅ መቆጠብ የግድ ነው።

The first was to publish ruling out the previous news; it would be inevitable to restrain my self from mentioning the other issues. 

   ማታ ላይ ሌሎች ያላወቁ ተሬ ጠባቂ ዎች (ታጋዮች) "እስኪ ጋዜጣው" ብለው ሳይቸግራቸው ማንበብ ይጀምሩና መጨረሻ ላይ በድንጋጤ ጋዜጣውን የት እንደሚጥሉት ግራ ይገባቸዋል። 

In the evening, security guards (comrades) from another shift unaware of what it dealt with said, "let's see the newspaper" and start reading, but suddenly didn't know where to put it back.  

የዚህን ቀን ምሽት ደግሞ ጋዜጣውን በስህተት ያነበበው ዋናው ጠርናፊ ነበር። 

Among them who read the newspaper un knowingly was the head of the evaluation or criticism.  

የፖለቲካ ጋዜጣ መሆኑን ሲያውቅ እንደ ኤሌክትሪክ ነዘረው። 

When he knew it was a political newspaper, he tells like an electric shock.  

ሰው አየኝ አላየኝ ብሎ ጋዜጣውን ጣለው ወይም አስቀመጠ። 

Either he threw it away or put it somewhere slowly, gazing at people around him as to whether they saw him.  

ቢሆንም ግን አልማሩትም። 

However, they didn't forgive him.  

ማታውን ሲራበሹ አመሹ።

They were arguing in the night.  

ብቻዬን ሆኜ ሁኔታቸውን ሁሉ እያሰብኩ እስቅ ጀመር። 

I started laughing thinking about their situation.  

እሱም ጉዱ ፈልቷል።

No one knows what kind of strange measures would be taken against him, too.  

የዚያን ቀን ማታ

That day evening

አሁን ውጪ ያለ ጓደኛዬን በህልሜ ውስጥ አየሁት። 

I saw a friend of mine who's abroad.  

ደቡብ ከመጣሁ በኋላ ያጋጠመኝን እየነገርኩት እንደድሮአችን እንስቅ ነበር። 

We were laughing like our olden days, happened to me after I came to the South.  

ሁለታችንም አንድ የምናምንበት የህይወት መመሪያ አለን። 

Both of us have one principle of life.  

"በኑሮ ውስጥ ብዙ ፈተና አለ። 

It says "There are as many tests in life.  

ነገር ግን የፈተናውን መጥፎና አሳዛኝ ጐን ሳይሆን አስቂኙን ተመልከት" ይላል። 

But look at the greener side of the test, not the negative ones." 

ሁልጊዜ መከራ ውስጥ ስንገባ የምንባባለው ሃቅ ነው። 

This is what we say to each other whenever we're in the midst of trouble.  

አሁንም የህይወትን አስቂኝ ጐን እያየሁ መዝናናት ጀመርኩ።

And hence, now, I started entertaining looking at funny side of life.  

ከዚህ እስር ቤት እስክወጣ ድረስ ከመከራው ባሻገር አንዳንድ ፍንጥቅጣቂ ፈገግታዎች አይጠፉም። 

Until I go out of this prison there would be some things I could laugh at.  

ለልጃገረዲቱ መጠለፍ ስጨነቅ የኔም መጠለፍ በራሱ አስገራሚ ነበር።

My abduction was by itself very amazing, while I was troubled about the girl's abduction.  

(ብዙ ማለት ቢቻልም ከዚህ በኋላ የምጽፍበት ወረቀት የለኝም። 

(Although there was a lot to be said, I don't have papers to write on.  

ይህ ማስታወሻ ከዚህ ወጥቶ ለህትመት ከበቃም ድንቅ ነው፣ ከሃጢአት ተቆጥሮ የእስር ሰንሰለቴን እንዳያጠብቅብኝ እንጂ ብዙ ብናወጋ ደስ ባለኝ ነበር)

It would be great if this paper sees publication; I would have liked to talk longer had this been considered sinful and aggravated my imprisonment.)  

ከፊያሜታ ሚያዝያ 21 ቀን 1990

From Fiameta April 29, 1998
