

               ለፓትርያርኩ አጀብ ወደ ቁልቢ ተጉዞ የነበረው መሳሪያ በመንገድ ላይ ተያዘ

The Gun that was used to accompany the patriarch while he went to Kulibe was seized on the way

   ሐምሌ 19 ቀን፣ 1991 ዓ.ም በተከበረው የቁልቢ ቅዱስ ገብርኤል ዓመታዊ በዓል ለመገኘት ወደ ስፍራው ለተጓዙት ፓትርያኩ ጥበቃ የሚያገለግል ወደ ቁልቢ በቤተ-ክህነቱ በኩል ተጉዞ የነበረው ክላሽ ኮኘ ጠብመንጃ መሳሪያ በጉዞ ላይ እያለ በመንገድ መያዙ ተገለፀ።

The Clashin-Kov gun that was make to accompany the patriarch who went to attend the annual church service at Kulibe St. Gabriel church on July 27, 1999, by the clergy was seized on its way, it was disclosed.   

   ሪፖርተራችን ጉዱዩን አስመልክተው እንደዘገበው ፣ የፓትሪያርኩ የህት ልጅ አቶ ያሬድ ከበደው፣ የዘብ ኃላፊ የሆኑት አቶ ብርሃኔና በርካታ የቤተ-ክህነት ጥበቃ ሠተኞች ፣ እንዲሁም ወደበዓሉ ያመሩ የቤተ-ክርስቲያኒቱ ልዩ ልዩ ሠራተኞች በመሆን በዛ ያሉ ተሽከርካሪ መኪኖችን በመያዝ ቁልቢ ሊደርሱ ትንሽ ሲቀራቸው በአካባቢው የመንግት የጥበቃ ሠራተኞች አማካኝነት ፍተሻ ተደርጐ መሳሪያው መያዙ ተገልጿል።

According to our reporter's disclosure the patriarch's nephew, Mr. Yared Kebedew, Mr. Berhane who'd head of the security, and several security guards of the clergy, as well as various workers of the church who were heading towards the church, accompanied by many vehicles, were about to reach kulibe when suddenly the area government security guns made a search and the gun was seized.

   ፓትርያርኩን ጨምሮ ተከታዮቻቸው ሊቃነ ጳጳሳት ሐምሌ 17 ቀን ፣ 1991 በአየር ከአዲስ አበባ ወደ ድሬደዋ የተጓዙ ሲሆን ፣ መኪናዎችን በመያዝ ለአቀባበል ቀድመዋቸው የተጓዙት የፓትርያርኩ የቅርብ ቤተሰቦች ከዲስ አበባ የተነሡት ሐምሌ 15 ቀን 1991 ነበር።

Including the patriarch and his deputy archbishops went by airplane on the 25th of July, 1999 from Addis Ababa to Dire Dawa, while the patriarch's close relatives who went early by car to warmly receive him on the 23rd of July 1999.

   ሐምሌ 15 ቀን አዱራቸውን አዋሽ ያደረጉት እነዚህ የፓትርያርኩ ቤተኞች ሐምሌ 16 ቀን ባልጠበቁት አጋጣሚ ከነመሳሪያቸው እንደተያዙ ነው የዓይን ምስክሮችን ዋቤ ያደረገው የሪፖርተራችን ዘገባ የገለጸው።

Those Friend of the family who spent the night on the 23rd of July at Awash, were aught with the gun unexpectedly on July 24, our reporters disclosure quoting eye witnesses explained.

   ወደ ቁልቢ የተላኩት የፓትርያርኩ አጃቢዎች በሙሉ ሽጉጥ የታጠቁ ከመሆናቸውም ባሻገር ተጨማሪ ክላሽ ኮኘ በመኪናዎቹ ውስጥ እንዱለ መያዙንና «ለፓትርያርኩ ጥበቃ ተብሎ የመጣ ነው» ሲሉ አጃቢዎቹ ለአካባቢው የሠራዊት አባላት መግለፃቸውን ዘገባው አመልክቷል። 

The patriarch's entourage who were sent to Kulibe were not only all armed with pistols but also a Klashin Kov gun is seized in their car explaining to the area security force that "it was held for the purpose of the patriarch's security" the report disclosed.

«ቁልቢ የራሱ የሆነ የጥበቃ መሳሪያ አለው ፣ አስፈላጊ ከሆነም የአካባቢው የፀጥታ ኃይል አለ። 

"Kulibi has its own security guns; and if necessary there is the area security force.

ለምን መሳሪያ ይዛችሁ እንድትመጡ አስፈለገ?» 

Why was it necessary for you to bring guns?

ከአካባቢው ሰዎች ለፓትርያርኩ አጃቢዎችና የጦር መሳሪያ ይዘው ለተገኙት ወገኖች የቀረበ ጥያቄ ነበር። 

It was a question asked by the area people to the patriarch's entourage and armed members who were caught with pistols and the Klashin - Kov.  

ሆኖም ከብዙ ውጣ ውረድ ከፍተኛ መጉላላት በኋላ ሰዎቹ ከነመሳሪያቸው እንዲለቀቁ መደረጋቸውንም የሪፖርተራችንዘገባ ያስረዱል።

However, after so many ups and downs, the people were made to be released, out reporters disclosure explained. 

   ሌላው ከቤተ-ክህነቱ የደረሰን የዜና ዘገባ ደግሞ ወደ ቁልቢ ለሄዱት የፓትርያርኩ አጃቢ መሳሪያ አንጋቾች ከፍተኛ የውሎ አበል ወጪ እንደተደረገና በዓሉን ለማክበር ከቤተ-ክህነቱ ጽ/ቤት ወደ ቁልቢ ለሄዱት ባለሙያ ሊቃውንት ግን አበል እንዱልታሰበላቸው ገልጿል። 

The other news which we received from the clergy was that a lot of money was paid for the patriarch's entourage who hold the guns as per diem expense while no per diem was given to the scholar of the office of clergy who went to Kulibe.

በዚህም የሊቃውንቱን ልብ የነካ ቅሬታ እንዱለ አስረድቷል።

As a result, there was a great discontent from the side of the scholar, it explained. 

ከፊያሜታ ሐምሌ 21 ቀን 1991

From Fiameta July 28, 1999
