   

                             ታምራት ላይኔ ሆስፒታል ገቡ

                    Tamerat Layne was Admitted to the Hospital

   የሽግግር መንግሥቱ ጠ/ሚ/ር የነበሩት ታምራት ላይኔ በሥልጣን ላይ ያሉት የቀድሞ ጓደኞቻቸው ንስሃ እንዲገቡ ምክር ከለገሱ 3 ሳምንታት በኋላ ታመው ሆስፒታል ገቡ።

The former prime minister of the transitional government, Tamerat Layne became sick and admitted to a hospital three weeks after having told and advised former friends who were in power to confess their sins.

   ታምራት ላይኔ «ዝምታ ለበጊቷም አልበጀም» በማለት በልጆጃቸው ላይ አደጋ ለማድረስ ተሞክሮ ነበር ሲሉ ለኢትዮጵያ ሕዝቦች ማሳወቃቸው ይታወሳል። 

It's to be recalled that Tamrat Layne disclosed to Ethiopian people that there was an attempt to kill his sons, quoting an Ethiopian proverb "silence didn't help even the female lamb".

በእስር ላይ በነበሩበት ጊዜ በጥፊ እስከመመታት የደረሱት ታምራት ላይኔ (ገና ይህን ታሪክ በሂደት ይፋ ያደርጋሉ ተብሎ በጉጉት ይጠበቃል) ከቅርብ ጊዜ ወዲህ በጠቅላይ ፍ/ቤት መድረክ ላይ ከቀረበባቸው ክስ ራሳቸውን ለመከላከል የሚያደርጉት ጥረት ከፍተኛ የሕዝብ ድጋፍ አስገኝቶላቸዋል።

Tamerat Layne who was even slapped while he was in prison (he is expected to reveal this story in due process) has as of recently got people's support in his effort to defend the charges he's been accused of in the Supreme Court.

   በተለይ በምኒልክ ጋዜጣ በኩል ለኢትዮጵያ ሕዝቦች ይፋ የሆነው አቤቱታቸው ታምራት ከሙህሮች ተርታ ለመሰለፍ የሚያበቃቸውን ንባብ በእስር ቤት ሆነው ማገባደዳቸውን እንዳስመሰከረላቸው ታዛቢዎች ይናገራሉ። 

Especially his appeal which was made official through Menelik newspaper, has put Tamerat among the elites for he has written a scholarly paper in the prison, observers stated.

የአቶ ታምራት ባለቤትና ልጆች በአሁኑ ሰዓት ከሀገር ወጥተው የስደትን ኑሮ እየገፉ መሆናቸው ይታወቃል። 

It's known that Mr. Tamerat's wife and children are now leading a refugee life out of the country.

ታምራት ሥልጣን ላይ በነበሩበት ጊዜ ተቀናቃኞቻቸው ለባለቤታቸው የተቆረቆሩ በማስመሰል ሰፊ የስም ማጥፋት ዘመቻ አካሂደውባቸው እንደነበር ይታወሳል። 

While Tamerat was in power, his opponents in a pretext to sympathize with his wife opened up a defamation campaign, it was recalled.

ሆኖም ባለቤታቸው ለአሉባልታዎቹ ባለመንበርከክ ከአቶ ታምራት ጋር በመወገን እንዳሳፈሯቸው ቅርበት ያላቸው ምንጮች ይናገራሉ። 

Nevertheless, his wife wasn't defeated by gossips and took side with her husband and embarrassed them, close sources indicated.

ታምራት ላይኔ በምኒልክ ጋዜጣ ላይ በወጣው አቤቱታቸው እንዲህ ብለዋል «ለዚህ ያበቁኝን የቀድሞዎቹን ጓደኞቼን፣ እንደኔ ወህኒ ተወርውረው ከመማቀቅም በላይ ግፍና በደል እንዲፈፀምባቸው፣ እንደኔ ልጆች፣ ልጆቻቸው ግድያ እንዲደገስላቸው፣ እንደኔ ቤተሰቦች፣ ቤተሰባቸው እየተሰደደ የቀሩትም በገዛ ሀገራቸው እየተሰቃዩ እንዲኖሩ ፍፁም አልመኝላቸውም። 

Tamrat Layne said, in the appeal that appeared in Menlik Newspaper, "for my former friends, who have brought me here, I don't wish them to be thrown behind bars an suffer and befall wrong upon then just like me, just like my kids, I don't want their kids to face an invitation for death; just like my family, I don't ever wish their family to be in exile and the rest to suffer in their own country.

ለእኔ እንደሚመኙት እነሱ በችጋር ተቆልተው እንዲፈግሙም ጭራሽ አልመኝም። 

Just as they wish for me, I don't at any cost, wish them to be famished and die of hunger.

ይህ ሁሉ የሰዎች ሰይጣናዊ ገፅታ፣ የእነሱን መሳይ የአውሬነት ባህርይ እንጂ ሰብዓዊ ባህርይ ከቶ አይደለም።

All these are the satanic appearance, their in human character, but not at all human nature.

እኔ የምመኝላቸው ልብ እንዲያገኙ ብቻ ነው። 

What I wish them is to pray that they got a pure heart.

ለዚህች ሀገር የቆምንላት እኛ ብቻ ነን የሚለውን በግብዝነት የተሞላ ግትር አስተሳሰባቸውን አሽቀንጥረው፣ «ተሃድሶ» ብለው የጠሩትን የያእቆብ ጨዋታቸውን ረስተው፣ መላውን ሕዝብ በአንድነት ዓላማዎች ዙሪያ በማስተባበር፣ ለኢትዮጵያና ለሕዝቧ ደህንነትና ብልፅግና እንቆማለን የሚሉትን ምሁራንና ባለሙያዎች ሁሉ መጣፊያ ሳይጥፉባቸውና ክርስትና ስም ሳይሰጧቸው በማሰባሰብ ይቺን ሀገር ልትወጣ ከማትችልበት የውድቀት አፋፍ ለመመለስ የመጨረሻውን እል እንዲጠቀሙበት ነው። 

Rather than saying we're the only one who stand for this country, throwing this contemptuous and rigid attitude, forgetting their child game, James play which they call "reformation", they'd better coordinate all the people under unified aims, without giving names christened them, the elites and professionals who claim to stand for Ethiopian prosperity, it would be better if they use the last chance to project this country from the possible abyss she may fall in to.

ፀሐይቱ አዘቅዝቃለች እንጂ ገና አልጠለቀችም። 

The sun's inclined but not set completely.

የአስተሳሰብ ለውጥና የሚከፈት ልብ ግን እየጠየቀች ነው።

But she is asking for a heart and a change of attitude.

   1. የምፅአት ቀን ግም ያለች እንደሆን፣
   የነፍስ ዛንዝራን፣ የህይወት ብረት መዝጊያ...... አድኖት አያድን፣
   2. ሱባዔም አያግዝ፣ ሥጋወ ደሙ አይሆን፣
   3. አሁን ነው ንስሃ፣ አሁን ነው መፀለይ...... ዛሬ ነው መመነን፣
   አሉ አሉ መምህሩ
   የነፍስ ልጃቸውን ሲመክሩ ሲዘክሩ።»

   1. If the date of the Second Coming suddenly comes, 
     The snap fastener of the soul, the iron gate of life ..... wouldn't save,
   2. Retreating wouldn't help, nor would partaking holy communion,
   3. Now is the time for confession, now is the time for prayer ...... today is the time for             forsaking the world, 
     Said the teacher, preacher, while advising his spiritual son."

በአቶ ታምራት የሆስፒታል ቆይታ ዙሪያ ነገ በሚመጣው አስኳል ጋዜጣ ላይ ቀጣያ ዘገባ ይስተናገዳል።

A continuing report would be treated in tomorrow's asqual newspaper. 

                            ከሳተናው ጥር 20 ቀን 1994

                        From Satenaw January 28, 2002
