   

                             «ጄኔራል ጋውና ሊከሰሱ ነው»

                        "General Gawena is to be Accused"

ፍኖተ ዲሞክራሲ የሚባለው የኢሕአፓ ድምፅ የሚከትለውን ዘገባ አስተላልፏል።

Fenote Democracy, the voice of EPRP, relayed the following message.

ተደጋግሞ እንደተገለጸው በወያኔ ሥርዓት ውስጥ ምዝበራ ያልተስፋፋበት ሁኔታ የለም። 

As it was repeatedly expressed in the TPLF regime there's no situation where embezzlement was not rife.

ከሁሉም በላይ ደግሞ የመከላከያ ሚኒስቴርን ያክል እስከ አንገቱ ድረስ ያልተነከረበት ማግኘቱ ያጠራጥራል። 

Above all, it's doubtful to get someone innocent in the ministry as big as defense ministry.

ሰሞኑን ከመከላከያ የደረሱን ምንጮች እንደሚያስረዱት በውጭ ኦዲተሮች የመ/ቤቱ የሂሳብ ምርመራ ሙከራ ተካሂዶ ነበር።

The sources that reached us from the defense ministry recently explained that the accounts of the organization was attempted to be audited by external auditors.

   ገቢና ወጪው በተሳከረበት የሂሳብ ሰነድ ላይ በመመስረት በተደረገው ጥብቅ ምርመራ በትንሹ የ200 ሚሊዮን ብር ጉደለት መታየቱን ለማረጋገጥ ተችሏል። 

In these accounts documents where the income and expense were completely unmatched, the strict investigation conducted showed at least 200 million Birr missing.

ይህ የተገኘው ጉደለት በሰነድ በተከናወነ የገቢና ወጪ ሥርዓት ብቻ እንጂ ያለምንም ወጪና ገቢ የሆነ የገንዘብ ቁጥጥር ቢሰላ ብዙ እንደሚሆን ምንጮቹ ገልፀዋል። 

This missing money was found only by documents that were found in the proper income and expense voucher, but if the money that was missing is calculated in terms of money that was expended without registering it as income or expense, it could have been much more, the sources disclosed.

መከላከያ ሚኒስቴር በሀገሪቱ ከፍተኛ መሥሪያ ቤት ከመሆኑም በላይ በሚሊዮን የሚገመት በጀት የሚያገኘው እሱ ነው።

As Defense Ministry is the highest institution in the country, it would get budgets in millions.

   ይህ በቢሊዮን የሚገመተው በጀት በየአመቱ የሚመደብለት መ/ቤት በሥሩ በርካታ የገቢ ማስገኛ በመመደብ በርካታ ገንዘብ ይሰበስባል። 

The organization, in which the allocation of budget is in billions every year, collects a lot of money by allocating many fund-raising under it.

ከነዚህም መሐከል የመኮንኖች ክብብ በርካታ ፈረንጆች የመንግስት ባለስልጣኖች የሚዝናኑበትና ጐልፍ ክለብ በየክፍለ ጦሩና በየብርጌዶቹ የሚገኙ ወታደራዊ መደብሮችና መዝናኛ የሚ/መ/ቤት የነዳጅ ማመላለሻ ቦቴዎችና ገልባጭ መኪናዎችን የሚከራይበት እንዲሁም ... የደረቅ ጭነት ማመላሰሻ ኩባንያ አማካኝነት የሚገኘው ገቢ ተቆጣጣሪ የለውም ኦዲተሮችም አይተውት አያውቁም። 

Among these, the officers' club, where many expatriate and government officials entertain and the Golf club, the army shops and entertainment houses that are found in every division or army unit, the fuel transport trucks for ministry offices and other heavy frocks for rent as well as ... the income from dry load transporting company has no controller; auditors have never seen them.

ከዚህም ሌላ ለሠራዊቱ ማጠናከሪያ ተብሎ ከህዝብ የተሰበሰቡት በሚሊዮን የሚቆጠር ገንዘብ ለምን ተግባር እንደዋለ
ማንም የጠየቃቸው የለም። 

Moreover, the money in millions collected from people in the pretext of organizing the army was not known for what purpose it went, no body asked them.

አይኖርምም።

There won't be anyone.

   በመከላከያ ውስጥ ብዙ ጥያቄዎች ያለባቸው ቦታቸው የጠቅላይ ኢታማዞር፣ የመከላከያ ሚ/ር ዋና መ/ቤት አስተዳደርና ጥበቃ፣ የድርጅት ወይም ሎጀስቲካ መምሪያ ፣ መሃንዲስ መምሪያ፣ የምድር ጦር ፋይናንስና ቅስቀሳ መምሪያ እንዲሁም አየር ኃይል በግንባር ቀደምትነት የሚሰጠቀሱ መሆናቸውን ምንጮቹ ገልፀዋል።

The places which are suspected of these are commander-in-chief of the army, Administration and security of Ministry of Defense, organizational or Logistics Department, Engineering department, Ground Force Finance and Agitation Department as well as Air Force are the ones to be mentioned, the sources disclosed.

   ቀደም ሲል የተከናወነው ምዝበራ ተጠያቂ ሊሆን ይችላሉ ከሚባሉት ጄኔራል አበበ ተክለኃይማኖትና ጠቅላይ ኢታማዦር ሹም ፃድቃን ገ/ተንሳይ የጡረታ መብት ተከብሮላቸው በጡረታ ተሰናብተዋል። 

The individuals who can be considered accountable for the embezzlement conducted earlier, General Abebe Teklehaimanot and Commander-in-chief of the army, Tsadkan Gebre Tensay were retired.

ብዙ ጥያቄ ያለበት የመሐንዲስ መምሪያ ጄኔራል አለምሸት ደግፌ አሁን የአየር ኃይል አዛዥ ሆኗል።

The one department which could be accountable more, its head General Alemshet Degfe has now become Commander-in-chief of the Air Force.

   በጦሩ ውስጥ ለተፈፀመው ከፍተኛ ምዝበራ ግንባር ቀደም ተጠያቂ እንደሆነ የሚገመተው አንድ መኮንን ወደ ሲቪል ተቀይረዋል። 

One officer who's suspected as the forerunner of this embezzlement has been changed to a civilian.

አሁን በኃላፊነት ላይ ያሉት የመከላከያ ባለሥልጣናት በቀጥታም ሆነ በተዘዋዋሪ ከነመለስ ጋር ፀብ ስለሌላቸው የሰሩትን እየሰሩ ያሉት ሥራ ሳይቆጠር እንዲሾሙ ተደርገዋል። 

Since the present officials of the defense ministry directly or indirectly are not in disagreement with Meles were appointed, regardless of their malfunction.

ከቀድሞዎቹ የመከላከያ ባለሥልጣናት ለነመለስ መገበር ያልፈለገው የትምህርት አስተዳደር መምሪያ ኃላፊ የነበረው ጄ/ል ታደሠ በርሄ ጡረታ ተከልክሎ ከሠራዊቱ ከተሰናበተ በኋላ በተለይ በጦርነቱ ወቅት ከተፈፀመው የጦር መሳሪያ ግዢ ጋር በተያያዘ ከነስዬ አብርሃ ጋር ክስ ሊመሠረትበት ዳር ዳር እየተባለ መሆኑን ጉዳዩን በቅርብ የሚከታተሉ የመከላከያ ምንጮቻችን የላኩት ጥቆማ ያመለክታል። 

Among the former defense officials who didn't want to share to Meles and others, the head of educational administrative department, General Tadesse Berhe was not allowed to take his retirement, but was ousted from the army and now he's going to be charged in relation to the purchasing of ammunition during the war with Siye Abrha, the information our sources sent point out. 

በአጠቃላይ ከአሁን ቀደም ተደጋግሞ እንደተገለፀው የመለስ ዜናዊ የፀረ ሙስና ዘመቻ ከኢኮኖሚው ፋይዳው ይልቅ ለፖለቲካው ፋይዳው ትኩረት የተደረገበት በመሆኑ እስከአሁን የታሰሩት ባለሥልጣናትም ሆኑ ወደፊትም የሚታሰሩት ከነመለስ ጐራ በተቃራኒው ከቆሙት ከነስዬ አብርሃ ጋር የተያያዘ መሆኑን አብዛኛው ሰው እያመነ መምጣቱን የተሰጡ አስተያየቶች ያስረዳሉ።» 

In general, as has been pointed out repeatedly earlier, as the anticorruption campaign of Meles Zenawi focused on political benefit, rather than economic ones, the officials who were imprisoned up to now and the ones who would be taken into custody would be related to the case of Siye Abrha and others who stood in opposition to Meles, most people came to believe this from the suggestions given."

ሲል ዘግቧል።

It reported. 

                             ከሳተናው ጥር 6 ቀን 1994

                        From Satenaw, January 14, 2002   
