

                                ርእሰ አንቀጽ፦

                                  Editorial 

                        በዳኝነት አካባቢ የሚፈሰውን እንባ ለማበስ

             In Order to Wipe the tears shed around Judicature 

የሕግ ሰዎች አንድ ሰው ያለአግባብ ከሚታሠር ወንጀለኞች ቢያመልጡ ይመረጣል ይላሉ።

People of the law say instead of arresting one individual unjustly, it is better for criminals to escape.

ፍትሕ በቀልን፣ ፍትሕ ጥላቻን፣ ፍትሕ ፖለቲካን እንድታገለግል በሚሞከርበት አገር የዜጐች፣ የሐቀኛ ግለሰቦችና ማኅበረሰብ ሕልውና ዋስትና እንደማይኖረው ይታወቃል።

It is known that in a country where justice is to serve revenge, hatred, and politics, the truthful individuals and community's existence doesn't have any security.

ይህም በመሆኑ ዛሬ የታጠቁ ተቃዋሚዎች ይንቀሳቀሱባቸዋል በሚባልባቸው አካባቢዎች በተለይ በአማራውና በኦሮምያ ክልል በተቃዋሚነት የሚፈለግ ሰው ዘመድ አዝማድ እየተሰበሰበ ይታጐራል።

Because of this, today in areas where armed oppositions are said to operate, especially in the Amhara and Oromia region, the family of a member of opposition parties are put behind bars.

ወንጀል ግን ግለሰባዊ እንጂ በደም የሚተላለፍ እንዳልሆነ ይታወቃል።

Crime is individual by nature and in its not hereditary that passes through blood.

ይህ ብቻ አይደለም።

This is not alone. 

ዛሬ በከተሞችም በሆነ ባልሆነው የሚታሠረው ሰው እየተበራከተ መጥቷል።

Today the number of people who are imprisoned with one or the other reason have increased tremendously.

በዚህ ላይ በዳኞች እጥረት የፍርድ ቤቶች አሠራር በማያራምድ ማነቆ ውስጥ ገብቷል።

In addition, due to shortage of judges, the working procedures of courts have been shackled by crippling obstacles.

  ለመንግሥት ጽናት ዋስትና፣ ለሕዝብ ተገንና አለኝታ መኖሩ ሊረጋገጥ የሚችለው ፍትሕን የሚያስተናብሩ አካላት ነፃ ሆነው ከማናቸውም ጣልቃ ገብነትና ተጽእኖ ተላቅቀው መሥራት ሲችሉ ነው።

The security of government's perseverance, the protection and mainstay of the people are assured when bodies which carry out justice could work Freddy from any interference and influence.

ፍትሕን ያለ ደጅ ጥናትና ያለ ማንም፣ ያለ ምንም ችሮታ ለማግኘት መቻል መብት ይመስለናል።

We think that getting justice without waiting patiently and getting it as a gift is a right.

«ዘግይቶ የተሰጠ ፍርድ እንዳልተሰጠ ይቆጠራል» (justice delayed is justice denied) ይባላል።

They say, "Delayed justice is injustice" (justice delayed is justice denied).

ዛሬ በተለይ በፌዴራል ፍርድ ቤቶች በዳኞች እጥረት በተከሰተው የችሎቶች መጣበብ ጉዳዮች ውሣኔ ሳያገኙ እየተንከባለሉ ይገኛሉ።

Especially, today in Federal courts where due to shortage of judges, courts of session are seen compact and issues are being postponed for later times.

  ባለፉት መንግሥታት ጊዜ የነበረው የፍትሕ መጥፋት፣ የኢትዮጵያዊያን ፍርድ አጥቶ መንገላታት፣ ወዘተ፣ በሕዝቡና በመንግሥት መካከል ከባድ ቅራኔ መፍጠሩን ታሪክ መዝግቦታል።

The absence of the justice that used to be in the former governments, the fact that Ethiopians have been undergoing pain for they don't get justice at all, etc – created a big problem between the people and the government and history has registered it.  

እስካሁን ላልሰከነውና የበለጠ ውጥረት ላስከተለው ችግር ዳርጐናል።

It made us encounter a problem that has not get calmed down and resulted in greater tension.

በአጭሩ የዚህ ሕዝብ የፍትሕ ፍለጋ ትግልና ሩጫ ወደ ሐቀኛ መልስ ገና አልደረሰም።

In short, the search of the people for justice struggle and hastening hasn't approached a legitimate answer.

ይልቁንም የፖለቲካው ባሕርይና የመሪ ድርጅቱ አቋም ሕዝብ ሲመኘው ከኖረው ፍትሕ እጅግ ብዙ ርቀት ወስዶናል።

Instead, the characteristic of the politics and the ruling party's stand has taken us very far from what the people wished for long.

ትግሉንም አክርሮታል።

It also made the struggle harsh.

የዜጐች መሠረታዊ መብቶች ማስጠበቂያ፣ የባለሥልጣኖች ልጓም ሆኖ ሊያገለግል የሚገባውን ነፃ የዳኝነት ሥርዓት ጥያቄን መልስ ከፕሮፓጋንዳ ጠቀሜታው ብቻ የማየቱ ዝንባሌ በእጅጉ እየጐዳን ነው።

The free judiciary system which should some as a tool for maintaining basic rights and a bridle for officials, has only been seen as a propaganda, which hurts us very much.

ነፃ የዳኝነት ሥርዓት ሕገ - መንግሥታዊ ዋስትና አግኝቷል ይባላል።

Free judiciary system is said to have got constitutional security.

እንዳይሠራ ግን ተቀፍድዷል

But it is shackled by chain not to work

የዛሬው ሥርዓት ሥልጣን ላይ ከወጣ ወዲህ እንደትናንቱ ሁሉ አያሌ ሺህ ዜጐች በየእሥር ቤቱ ታጉረዋል።

Since the current regime held power, just like the earlier one, many thousand citizens are cooped up behind bars.

የታሠሩትን ሁሉ ወንጀለኛ ለማለት ግን አይቻልም።

But it's impossible to say that all that have been imprisoned are criminals.

እንዲህ ከተባለ ደግሞ ስሜታዊነት፣ በቀልና ጥላቻ ከፍትሕ ፊት ተደንቅረዋል ማለት ነው።

Yet if this claim are said to be true, then it means sentimentality, revenge and hatred stood before justice.

በሕግ እይታ በነፃ ፍርድ ቤት ተከራክሮ ካልተፈረደበት ማንም ሰው ወንጀለኛ አይደለም።

From the perspective of law, no one is criminal unless he/she is made to dispute in a free court and verdict is passed on hem/her.

አይባልምም።

No one can be called criminal.

በአሁኑ ጊዜ ያለው እውነታ ሲታይ ግን የአገራችን እሥር ቤቶች ነፃ ዜጐችን ማሳረፊያ ሥፍራዎች ሆነዋል ለማለት ያስደፍራል።

But when the present truth is viewed, our country' prisons can surely be said to have become places for stuffing free citizens.

እስካሁን የፍርድ ቤቶችን ደጅ የማያውቁ፣ በስልክ ተጠርተው፣ በራዲዮ ማስታወቂያ ተሰባስበው፣ ከቤትና ከአውራ ጐዳና ታድነው፣ ወዘተ፣ የታሰሩ ዜጐች እስከ መቼ በእሥረኝነት ይዘልቃሉ?

How long will they stay behind bars those who don't know the entrance of the court, who were just called on the telephone, gathered by a radio call, took from their houses and the road, etc?

ፍትሕ ሲዘገይ የተዛባ ፍርድ ያህል የሚጠላ ነው

  የራሱ አቋምና ተግባር አጠያያቂ የሆነው፣ የሞራል ጥንካሬው ዘወትር በአሉታዊነት የሚጠቀሰው ይህ ሥርዓት የሕሊና እሥረኞች፣ ጋዜጠኞች፣ የፖለቲካ ሰዎችና የመሳሰሉትን ይህን ያህል ጊዜ አስሮ ያቆየበትን ምክንያት ሲጠየቅ ዳኛ እንደሌለ፣ ዐቃቤ ሕግ እንደ ጐደለ፣ ፋይል መክፈት ጊዜ እንደ ፈጀ በማስረጃነት ሲያቀርብ ነበር።

When justice's delayed it's hated like injustice; 

This regime, the stand and activities of which are questionable, the moral strength of which is usually mentioned in its negativity, has been responding to the caused for the long arrest of prisoners of conscience, journalists, political individuals, and the like, the lack of judies, missing of prosecutors, opening files taking its time.

ይኸ የራሱ ችግርና ሰበብ ነው።

This is its won problem and pretext.

በሕዝብና በፍትሕ ፊት ተቀባይነት የለውም።

It is not acceptable in the face of the public and justice.

በዳኝነት ላይ ከፍተኛ እምነት የጣሉ፣ በየወህኒው ቤት የተቆለፈባቸው ዜጐች ሁሉ በአስቸኳይ ፍርድ ቤት ቀርበው እንዲፈረድላቸው ወይም እንዲፈረድባቸው ይፈልጋሉ።

Those who put great faith in the judicature, citizens who were put behind bars in the different prisons, urgently need to hear a verdict in favor or against them.

የተወሰኑ ሰዎች ለዳኝነቱ ተግባር ሲሰለጥኑና ሲዘጋጁ እንደነበር ተነግሮናል።

We were told that certain people were taking training for the judiciary tasks.

ዳኞች በሥርዓቱ ካድሬዎች ማሠልጠኛ ተቋም መሠልጠናቸው አግባብ ነው ባንልም በተለይ ለፌዴራል ፍርድ ቤቶች 30 ዳኞች ተዘጋጅተው ለሹመት ለሕዝብ ተወካዮች ምክር ቤት ይቀርባሉ ከተባለ ወራት አለፉ።

Although we say that it's not proper the fact that judges are being trained in cadres training centre, but months have passed since it was told that 30 judies are prepared to be predated to the council of peoples' representative for promotion. 

ምክር ቤቱ ለእረፍት ከመዘጋቱ በፊት ይሾማሉ ተብሎ ተጠበቀ።

They were expected to be appointed before the council's break for summer recess. 

አልሆነም።

But it didn't happen. 

ምክር ቤቱ በአዲሱ ዓመት የዳኞችን ሹመት የመጀመሪያ ሥራው እንደሚያደርግ ተገምቶ ነበር።

The council was expected to make the appointment of judges its first priority.

ግምቱ አልሠራም።

The expectation didn't work out.

ባለጉዳይ ግን አሁንም እየተጉላላ ነው።

People with cases are still unjustly treated.

በቀጠሮ ሲንከባለሉ የኖሩ ፋይሎች ወደ 1991 እንደገና በቀጠሮ እየተወረወሩ ይገኛሉ።

The files which used to be postponed are being thrown again to be seen for 1999.

በአዲስ እይታና ዕምነት ሠልጥነዋል የሚባሉት ዳኞች ለፍትህ ያላቸው ዕምነት፣ ለሕዝብ ያላቸው ታማኝነት ወደፊት የሚታይ ሆኖ ወደ ተግባር መሠማራታቸው ግን ዛሬ በፋይሎች መደራረብና በዳኞች እጥረት በዳኝነት አካባቢ የሚፈሰውን እንባ በመጠኑም ቢሆን ያብሳል የሚል እምነት አለን።

The judges who were said to have been trained with new outlook and belief would be seen in the days ahead as to what kind of faith they have to justice and their loyalty to the people, but we believe that they, even if to some extent, would be able to wipe the tears that are shed to day around the judicature due to excessive files an shortage of judges. 

ከጦቢያ ጥቅምት 27 ቀን 1990

From Tobia November 6, 1997
