

                            ቢያንስ የወጡ ሕጐች ይከበሩ

                     At least Let's honor the Current Legislature 

የኢንፎርሜሽን ሰዎች እንደመሆናችን ስለኢንፎርሜሽን የሚባለው ሁሉ ይመለከተናል።

As we are people of information anything said about information will concern us.

ባለፈው ሳምንት ላይ «የኢንፎርሜሽን ቀን» መከበሩንና ይህንኑ ዕለት ምክንያት በማድረግ የተባለውን ሁሉ የተከታተልነው እንደማንኛውም አድማጭና አንባቢ ከውጭ ሆነን ነው።

We followed last week's celebration of "Information Day" and what was said commemorating the date just like any other listener and reader, from outside.

ቀኑን ለማድመቅ ከቀረቡት ዝግጅቶች አንዱ የመገናኛ ብዙሃን ልዩ ልዩ ገጽታዎች የተገመገሙበት ሲምፖዚዬም ነው።

Among the festivities presented to make the date colorful, was the symposium that evaluated the different looks of mass media.

የነፃውን ፕሬስ ቤተሰቦች የወከሉ ሀሳቦች ግን አልተደመጡም።

But ideas representing the free press haven't been heard.

ቢደመጡም አንዳንድ ተሳታፊ ግለሰቦች የሰነዘሩአቸው ሀሳቦች ናቸው።

Even when they were heard, they were the ideas of few participant individuals.

ይህ ሊሆን የቻለው ከነፃው ፕሬስ ቤተሰቦች እንዲገኙ ባለመፈለጋቸው ነው።

This was because, they didn't want the presence of families of free press.

ዋልታ የኢንፎርሜሽን ማዕከል፣ የቴሌቪዥን ድርጅትና የኢትዮጵያ ሳይንስና ቴክኖሎጂ ኮሚሽን በቅንጅት አዘጋጁት ከተባለው ከዚህ «የኢንፎርሜሽን ቀን» መድረክ ተቃዋሚ የፖለቲካ ድርጅቶች (ቢያንስ በሕግ ተመዝግበዋል የተባሉት) እና ይልቁንም ዕለቱ በቀጥታ የሚመለከታቸው ነፃ ፕሬሶች መገለላቸው በዚህች አገር የማን ሀሳብ ጐልቶ እንዲሰማ፣ የማን ሥልጣን ጐልብቶ እንዲወጣ እንደሚፈለግ ገሀድ አመልካች ነው።

The "Information Day" which was said to have been organized integratively by Walta Information Center, Television Organization and Ethiopian science and Technology Commission, Opposition Organizations (at least which are said to be legally registered) and even the free press to which the date directly refers have been put aside, which Vividly points out whose ideas are boldly listened to and whose authority is wanted to be seen on the fore. 

«ነፃ ሀሳብ፣ ነፃ ፕሬስ፣ ነፃ ኢኮኖሚ፣ ነፃ ምርጫ፣ ነፃ ዳኝነት» እየተባለ ስለዴሞክራሲያዊ ሥርዓት የሚደለቀው ከበሮ የዓለም የገንዘብ ድርጅት (IMF) እና የዓለም ባንክ ብር እንዳይቀር፣ ለውጭ ፕሮፓጋንዳ ፍጆታ መሆኑ በግልጽ ታይቷል።

The drum that was beaten as "Free idea, Free Press, Free economy, Free election, Free Judicature," for democratic order has been clearly seen that it's used for the consumption of foreign propaganda so as to make sue the money from the International monetary Fund (IMF) and the world Bank comes. 

  የሚያስገርመውና የሚያሳዝነው ደግሞ ለአገሪቱ ሳይንስና ቴክኖሎጂ ዕድገት ቆሜአለሁ የሚለው መሥሪያ ቤት ለአንድ ድርጅት ፕሮፓጋንዳ መከራውን ሲያይ መታየቱ እንጂ ዋልታ የኢንፎርሜሽን ማዕከልንና የቴሌቪዥን ድርጅትን እናውቃቸዋለን።

What is amazing and sorrowful is to see the organization which claims to stand for the development of the country's science and technology, it victimized, otherwise, we know Walta Information Center and Television Organization.

ከሃምሳ ዓመታት በላይ ያገለገለውን መንግሥታዊውንና የአገሪቱ ኦፊሴላዊ የዜና ምንጭ የሆነውን የኢትዮጵያ ዜና አገልግሎትን አዳክሞ በብቸኛ የዜና ምንጭነት ለመወጣት ከሚታገለውና የኢሓዴግ የፕሮፓጋንዳ ምንጭ ከሆነው «ዋልታ ኢንፎርሜሽን ማዕከል» ስለነፃው ፕሬስ በጐ እይታ አንጠብቅም።

It is not expected from the EPRDF's propaganda source, "Walta Information Center", which struggles to weaken the Ethiopian News Agency that has been serving the country for over fifty years, and is official News Source of the country, to have positive image for the free press.  

በደርግ ቢሮክራሲና በእስር ቤት የነበሩትን የኢሓፓ ከጂዎች ለአዲሱ ቢሮክራሲ አገልግሎት ያዘጋጀውን ፎረም - 84ን በሊቀመንበርነት የሚመራ ግለሰብ ከሚያካሄ%ደው የቴሌቪዥን ድርጅት አሁን ካለው የተለዬ ሆኖ እናገኛለን ብለን የምናምን የዋሆች አይደለንም።

Forum-84 which was established for the purpose of the new bureaucratic service, including the chairman by full of defectees of EPRP who were in prison and in the Dergue bureaucracy, we are not naïve to expect that it would be any different from the present Television organization.

  «የኢንፎርሜሽን ቀን» ሲከበር በሰነበተበት ሳምንት 18 የነፃው ፕሬስ ጋዜጠኞች በወህኒ ቤትና በማዕከላዊ እስር ቤት እንደሚገኙ ይታወቃል።

At the time the "Information week" was commemorated, it's known that 18 free press journalists are in prison.

ስለ እነሱ ምንም አልተባለም።

Nothing was said about them.

ዓለም አቀፍ የጋዜጠኞች መብት ድርጅት (Committee to Protect Journalist - CPJ) እ.አ.አ. በ1997 ማለትም በያዝነው ዓመት ባወጣው መግለጫ ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር መለስ ዜናዊን በዓለም ላይ ከሚገኙ አስር የፕሬስ ጠላቶች አንዱ አድርጓቸዋል።

The International Journalist organization (            ) in the statement it released in 1997, that is, this year, categorized Prime Minister Meles Zenawi as one of the ten press enemies of the world. 

ይህን እውነታ በስሙ ብዙ የሚባልለት ሕዝብ እንዲያውቀው አልተደረገም።

This reality was not disclosed to the people who have been said so many things about them.    

የተቃዋሚ ፖለቲካ ድርጅቶች ሀሳቦች በመንግሥታዊ መገናኛ ብዙሃን እንዳይስተናገዱ ተከልክለዋል።

The ideas of political opposition organizations were made not to be entertained on the government mass media.

ለይስሙላና ለፕሮፓጋንዳ ግን የመንግሥታዊ መገናኛ ብዙሃን አጠቃቀም ሕግ ወጥቷል።

But for the sake of propaganda consumption, legislatures for working procedure of government mass media have passed on.

ከመንግሥት ሚዲያ ጐን ገዥው ፓርቲ ዋልታ ኢንፎርሜሽን፣ ራዲዮ ፋና፣ አብዮታዊ ዴሞክራሲ፣እፎይታ፣ ወዘተ፣ ወዘተ፣ እያለ የራሱን የፕሮፓጋንዳ ሥርዓት በመዘርጋት የሀሳብ ሞኖፖሊ ለመፍጠር ደፋ ቀና እያለ ነው።

Next to the government media, the ruling party is trying its best to establish the monopoly of ideas by forming its own propaganda order calling them, Walta Information, Radio Fana, Abiyotawi Democracy, Efoyata, etc. 

በአንፃሩ በነፃው ፕሬስ ላይ ሠፊ የፕሮፓጋንዳ ዘመቻ ከፍቷል።

On the other hand, it opened a wide propaganda campaign on the free press.

እነዚህ ሁሉ ችግሮች በዚያ ብዙ በተባለለት የ«ኢንፎርሜሽን ቀን» አልተወሱም።

All these problems were not mentioned on that date, "Information Day", which was praised a lot.

ብቻ በዚህ መድረክ እስከዛሬ የሆነውን ሁሉ አብረው ሲያማስሉ የነበሩ ግለሰቦች ሂሳዊ ለመሆን ሲሞክሩ አድምጠን የፖለቲካው አየር የሚነፍስበትን አቅጣጫ የማየት ችሎታቸውን አድንቀናል።

But in that forum, individuals who have been meddling all the way up to now, were observed to be seem critical, where we appreciated their ability to see the direction where the political wind blew.

  እድሉን ብናገኝ ኖሮ ትልቁ ጥያቄአችን «ገዥው ፓርቲና ባለሥልጣኑ መንግሥት ቢያንስ ራሳቸው ላወጡት ሕግ ይገዙ!» የሚል በሆነ ነበር።

If we get the opportunity our big question would have been, "the ruling party and the authoritative government, at least let them honor the legislature they passed on!" this was our question.

የኢትዮጵያ ፌዴራላዊ ዲሞክራሲያዊ ሪፐብሊክ ሕገ - መንግሥት በአንቀጽ 29 ላይ ማንም ሰው የመሰለውን አመለካከት ለመያዝ እንደሚችል ደንግጓል።

The Ethiopian Federal Democratic Republic Government in its Article 29 decreed that every individual has the right to hold on any attitude he believes in.

ይሁንና ሰዎች ኦነግ፣ መአህድ፣ ኢሓፓ እየተባሉ ይሳደዳሉ።

Nonetheless, individuals are chased by being called OLF, AAPO, and EPRP.

ኦነግነት፣ መአህድነት፣ ኢሓፓነት አንድ የተወሰነ ፖለቲካዊ አመለካከት ማራመድ ይመስለናል።

We think that being an OLF, AAPO or EPRP means holding to one political outlook.

የሚያሳስርበትና የሚያስገድልበት ምክንያት አልታያችሁ ብሎናል።

We can't see why it has become a reason for being taking to custody or killed. 

ሌላው ቀርቶ የነፃው ፕሬስ ጋዜጠኞች በጋዜጣና መጽሔታቸው ባሰፈሩት ሀሳብ ይከሰሳሉ ይታሠራሉ።

Leave alone other things, free press journalists are made to be arrested or accused for the ideas they put on their newspapers and magazines.

እንደ ሕገ -- መንግሥቱና እንደ ፕሬስ ሕጉ ከሆነ ነፃው ፕሬስ መረጃ የማግኘት መብት አለው።

But according to the constitution and press low the free press has the right to get information.

የመረጃው በር ግን ተከርችሟል።

But the door that takes to the information is sealed.

በሕገ - መንግሥቱ አንቀጽ 29 ንዑስ አንቀጽ 6 የአመለካከት እና ሀሳብን በነፃ የመያዝና የመግለጽ መብቶች «ገደብ ሊጣልባቸው የሚችለው የሀሳብና መረጃ የማግኘት ነፃነት በአስተሳሰባዊ ውጤት ሊገታ አይገባውም በሚል መርህ ላይ ተመሥርተው በሚወጡ ሕጐች ብቻ ይሆናል።»

In the rights to hold and express ideas freely mentioned under the constitution, article 29 sub-article 6 "the sanction on the right to get ideas and information could be operational only by laws that are asked on the products of attitude can not be obstructed.

የሚል ሠፍሯል።

"A clause that says like that is written.

የነፃው ፕሬስ ጋዜጠኞች ግን አሁንም በጋዜጣና በመጽሔት ባሠፈሯቸው የግለሰብ ሀሳቦች (opinion articles) ጭምር «የሕዝብን ሀሳብ ሊያናውጥ የሚችል» በሚል ክስ እየታሠሩና እየተከሰሱ ናቸው።

The free press journalists, however, are even now are being arrested and accused, by the opinions they wrote (even in opinion articles), of "troubling the ideas of people". 

መንግሥት በማንኛውም የሕይወት ዘርፎች ችግሮች መኖራቸውን ሲገነዘብ ችግር አስወጋጅ ሕጐችን ያወጣል።

When government realizes that there are problems in any life sectors it passes on problem-solving legislatures.

በፕሬስ አካባቢ በርካታ ለፕሬስ ዕድገት የማይበጁ ችግሮች እንዳሉ እናውቃለን።

We know that there are several problems around press that do not help the development of press.

ይሁንና ሕግ አውጥቶ ችግሮችን ማቃለሉ ቢቀር ቀደም ሲል ወጥተው በሥራ ላይ ያሉት ህጐች ሊከበሩ ይገባል።

Yet, if not passing on legislature and solving the problem, the previously decreed legislatures which are operational should be honored.

በሌሎች አገሮች ለታዳጊ ፕሬሶች እንደሚደረገው ዓይነት ድጐማውንና ታክስ ቅነሳውን ለልብ ወዳጆች ትተን ወከባውና እሥራቱ ይቅርልን።

Leaving alone what is being done in other countries like subsidizing and reducing tax for developing press which may be done only for friends, we say let the pressure and arrest stop.  

ከጦቢያ ኅዳር 11 ቀን 1990

From Tobia November 20, 1997
