

                                ርእሰ አንቀጽ፦

                                Editorial

                              አቅጣጫው ወዴት ነው?

                          Where is the Direction?

  ባለፈው ሰሞን «አብዮታዊ ዴሞክራሲ» የተባለው የኢሓዴግ ጋዜጣ ጦቢያን ጨምሮ ነፃውን ፕሬስ «ተሸናፊዎች የተሰባሰቡበትና በተቃዋሚ ወገኖች እየተደጐመ የሚንቀሳቀስ» ብሎ ፈርጇል።

EPRDF's press "Abiyotawi Democracy" last week categorized, including Tobia, the free press "gathering of the Defeated and that operate on the support by opposition sides".

ውሎ ሳያድር ከ10 በላይ የጋዜጣ አዘጋጆችና አሳታሚዎች ታፈሱ።

In no time more than 10 editors and publishers of newspapers were arrested.

ሦስት ሳምንታዊ ጋዜጦች ማለትም ኢቶጵ፣ ወንጭፍና ኡርጂ ከህትመት ውጭ ሆኑ።

Three weekly newspapers, that is, Ethiop, wenchif and Urji became out of publication.

መፍትሔው ተጨማሪ ጥቃት ሊሆን ባልተገባው ነበር።

The solution shouldn't have been additional assault. 

በነፃው ፕሬስ ውስጥ የሚሠሩት እነእከሌ ናቸው እያሉ ጣት መቀሰሩ የሚፈይደው ነገር የለም።

Point in at someone saying that he/she works in the free press wouldn't bring about any good.

«እናንተስ እነማን ናችሁ?»

"who are you?"

የሚል ጥያቄ ያስከትላል።

a question would follow.

ይልቁንስ ፋይዳ የሚኖረው ነፃው ፕሬስ ለሚሰጣቸው ኢንፎርሜሽኖችና አስተያየቶች ትኩረት ሰጥቶ የራስን ስህተት በጊዜው ማረም ነበር።

Instead, what's of worth is giving focus on the information and suggestions the free press offered and corrects one's mistakes on time.

  አባባሉን በተጨባጭ መረጃ ሊደገፍ የማይችል የዴሞክራሲ ጠላቶች ተራ አሉባልታ አድርገን የወሰድነው ቢሆንም ስለ ጦቢያ ሕትመቶችና ስለአሳታሚው አክፓክ አሁንም ግልጽ እንዲሆን የምንፈለገው ዓቢይ ጉዳይ አለ።

Although we took the suggestion as mere gossip of enemies of democracy that can not support itself with tangible evidence, we would still like to make clear one major issue about the publications of Tobia and its publisher, Akpak.

እንደ ነፃ ፕሬስ አባልነቱ ለሕዝብ ሊሰጠው የሚገባውን አገልግሎት ለማበርከት አክፓክ ሲነሣ የአባላቱን የተካበተ የዘመናት ልምድ፣ እውነትንና የአእምሮ ጥራት ይዞ ነው።

As a member of free press, when Akpak rose to give service to make public, it was confident of the wide and rich experience of its members, as well as truth and quality of the mind.

ከመነሻው በማንም ላይ ቂም ቋጥሮ አልተነሳም።

From the outset, it doesn't hold any grudges against another.   

የኢትዮጵያ ሕግ በሚያዝዘው መሠረት በ15 ሰዎች ካፒታል የተቋቋመ እንጂ የአንድ ወይም የሁለት ሰዎች ንብረትም አይደለም።

Based on what the Ethiopian law commands it was establish had by a capital of 15 people, but it is not the property of one or two people.

አክፓክ ሲመሠረት እንደ ፕሬስ አሳታሚነቱ ለሕዝብ ያለበትን የኃላፊነት ስሜት ባለመዘንጋት የፖለቲካ ድርጅቶችን ወገናዊነት በተግባሩ ውስጥ በደባልነት ሳያስገባ፣ ሕዝባዊ ወገናዊነትን መሪ ብርሃኑ አድርጐ ነው የተነሣው።

When Akpak was established as a publisher of press it took as a light of leading principle not forgetting the responsibility it had for the public, not including favoring political organizations in its work, rather focus on public awareness.

የዴሞክራሲውንና የነፃውን ፕሬስ መጐልበት የማይፈልጉት እንደሚሉት የአክፓክ እትሞች የሚያደሉለት የሕዝብ ክፍል ወይም ፓርቲ የለም።

As those sides who do not wish the strengthening of democracy and free press claim, there is no part of the public or party the publication of Akpak favors.

የነፃ ሀሳብ መድረኮች ናቸው።

They are forums of free ideas.

ዛሬም ወደፊትም በዚህ መርሕ በመጽናት ተግባሩን ያከናውናል።

It would perform its tasks today and in the future sticking to this principle.

  በርግጥ ከጠባብ አካባቢ ይልቅ የሰፋ አገር፣ ከመለያየት ይልቅ አንድነት፣ ከጥላቻና ከቂም ይልቅ መግባባትና ፍቅር ይስፈን ስለሚልና የጐሣ ፖለቲካን ስለማይቀበል የጊዜው ንፋስ ተጠቃሚዎች ላይወዱት ይችላሉ።

Indeed since it holds the ideas of wide country rather than narrow area, unity rather than difference, love rather than hat red and grudges and since it doesn't accept racial politics, the beneficiaries of the present wind may not like it.

  በአንዳች ፀረ ፕሬስና ፀረ ዴሞክራሲ ኃይላት ሴራ አደጋ ቢደርስበት ወይም ተግባሩ ቢደናቀፍ ደግሞ ሌሎች አያሌ ወጣት ኢትዮጵያውያን እውነትንና ዴሞክራሲን ለማስፈን፣ የተገፋውን ሕዝብ በማገልገል ረገድ ሰልፋቸውን ስላሳመሩ ቆመን የምናፈስሰው እንባ አይኖርም።

If through the conspiracy anti-press and anti-democratic forces it encounters peril, we won't have tears to shed for there are many young Ethiopians who have made their positions clear to make democracy reign, to serve the mistreated people.

ኢትዮጵያ ዘወትር የሚሞቱላት ልጆች ከሥር ከሥሩ ትወልዳለች።

Ethiopia usually gives birth after birth to children who would sacrifice for her. 

እየወለደች መሆኑም በገሃድ እየታዬ ነው።

And the fact that she delivers is being openly witnessed.

  በዚህ አገዛዝ ሥር አበሳቸውን ካዩ፣ የጥቃት ሰለባ ከሆኑና የመከራው ዙር ከበዛባቸው ባለሙያዎች መካከል የፕሬሱ ሠራዊት አንደኛውና ዋነኛው ነው።

Among those who suffer from this regime, became victims of attack and professionals, who frequent hardship, the army of the press is the first and the main one.

ነፃ ፕሬስ የዴሞክራሲ አለኝታና ምሰሶ ነው።

Free press is the central pillar and mainstay of democracy.

ነፃ ፕሬስ ማለት የአምባገነንነት ሥርዓት ጠላት ማለት ነው።

Free press means the enemy of dictatorial regime.

የኢ - ፍትሐዊና የሥልጣን ማጋጣዎች ማጋለጫና መታገያ ማለት ነው።

It means exposing and struggling the injustice and power corruptors.

ስለዚህ የነፃው ፕሬስ አባላት በታሰሩና በተሰቃዩ ቁጥር ተግባራቸውን በከባድ መስዋዕትነት እያከናወኑ መሆናቸው ይሰማቸዋል።

Therefore, the more the free press members are imprisoned and suffered, the better they feel about their performance that they display with great sacrifice.

በዚህም ይኮሩበታል እንጂ አያፍሩበትም።

They feel proud, not ashamed about it.

አምባገነኖች በተወራጩ፣ ለቅጥፈት አራጋቢነትና መርዘኛ ፕሮፓጋንዳ ለመርጨት ያቋቋሙአቸው ልሳኖቻቸው በተንጫጩ ቁጥር በየጊዜው በብዙ ቁጥር የሚታሰሩት ጋዜጠኞች የሚጽናኑ ይመስለናል።

When ever dictators tossed and turned, the press they established for the purpose of fanning perfidy and releasing poisonous propaganda cried over nothing, it seems to us that the many journalists who are imprisoned would be consoled. 

  እሥረኞቹ በአብዛኛው የሕሊና እሥረኞች፣ የፖለቲካ ድርጅቶች መሪዎችና አባላት፣ እንዲሁም የሕዝብ ሕሊና የሆኑ ጋዜጠኞች በሆኑበት አገዛዝ ውስጥ መገኘታችን ይታወቃል።

It is known that we are found in a regime where the prisoners are mostly prisoners of conscience, leaders of political organizations and members, as well as journalists who are conscience of the public. 

ይህ ሁኔታ ከቀን ወደ ቀን አልተለወጠም ወይም አልተሻሻለም።

This situation hasn't changed or improved from day to day.

ቢሻሻልማ ለአገዛዙ የተሻለ የፖለቲካ ገጽታ በሰጠው ነበር።

Had it improved, it would have given the regime a better look.

ዳሩ ግን የወቅቱ መንግሥት በሰባዊ መብት ረገጣው፣ በዴሞክራቲክ ባሕርያት እጦቱና በነፃው ፕሬስ አፈናው በዓለም ፊት ተጋልጦአል።

Nonetheless, the current government is exposed be fore the world in its human rights violation, lack of democratic characteristics, and in its suppression of free press.

የወቅቱ ጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር አቶ መለስ ዜናዊ በስም ተወስተው ከአሥሩ የነፃ ፕሬስ ጠላቶች ውስጥ አንዱ መሆናቸው መጠቀሱ አያኮራም።

The present Prime Minister Mr. Meles Zenawi, who was mentioned by name as one of the ten enemies of the free press, doesn't make anyone proud.

ጀግንነት አይደለም።

It's not patriotism.

የራሱን ወገን በማሰቃየት ውግዘትን እንጂ መደነቅን ያተረፈ መሪም በታሪክ ውስጥ አናገኝም።

We found condemnation, not admiration in history for a leader who brought suffering to his own fellow people.

  ከቅርብ ሳምንታት ወዲህ የፖሊስና የማዕከላዊው ምርመራ ሰለባ በመሆን ወደ ተለመደው አስፈሪ እሥር ቤት የገቡ ጋዜጠኞች ቁጥር በርከት ያለ ነው።

The number of journalists who became victims of police and central investigation and were put to the routine threatening prison cells as of recent weeks are many.

ፍርድ ቤት ቅጣት ሳይወስንባቸው ኑሮአቸው በፖሊስ ጣቢያና በወህኒ ቤት የሆነ ጋዜጠኞችም ተበራክተዋል።

Journalists whom the court hasn't passed verdict and whose life are in the police stations and prisons are getting numerous.

ቀደም ሲል አንድ ዓመትና ከዚያም በላይ እየታሰሩ የተለቀቁ ወጣት ጸሐፊዎች መከራውን ቢችሉትም አንድ ንጹሕ ዜጋ በከንቱ እሥር ቤት ተጥሎ የሚቀበለውን መከራ የተጋሩ አድርጐ መገመት ይቻላል።

Although the young writers who previously were imprisoned for a year and above and were released have borne the pain, it would be difficult to expect to share the pain an innocent citizen undergoes in prison in vain.

ይኸ ሁሉ አለች ስትባል የነበረችው ዴሞክራሲና ፍትሕ ከአገራችን እየተሰደደች ለመሆኑ አንድ ማስረጃ ነው።

It is an experience to show that the democracy and justice which was said to live in our country is now being ejected.

  በሕግ ስም የሚሠራው ቴያትር አልበቃ ብሎ የገዥው ፓርቲ ጋዜጣ፣ የመንግሥት፣ የድርጅት ልሣን የሚባሉት እትሞች ነፃውን ፕሬስና ጋዜጠኞቹን በስም እየጠሩ ከንቱ ሐሜትና አሉባልታ ለመንዛት ሞክረዋል።

As if the drama which was played in the pretext to law was not sufficient, the newspaper of the ruling party, government, so-called press of organizations attempted to spread malicious gossips and back biting calling the free press and journalists by name. 

ይኸ ደግሞ በሕዝቡ ጥቅምና ደኅንነት፣ አንድነትና ሰላም ላይ «ለቆመው» አምስተኛ ረድፈኛ ፕሬስ ሕጋዊነትም ሕዝባዊነትም አያሰጠውም።

This doesn't allow the fifth row press that "suppresses" the benefit, security and unity of the people to have legality as well as publicity.

«ጋዜጠኞች ነን፣ ትክክለኛ ዜና የምናቀርብ እኛ ነን፣ የፕሬሱን ግዴታ እየተወጣን ነን» የሚሉ ወገኖች በተግባር የሚፈጽሙትን እናውቀዋለን።

We know what these groups who say "We are journalists; we are the ones who present the right news; we are discharging the duties of the press" are practically performing.

የኢትዮጵያ ሕዝብም በሚገባ ያውቀዋል።

The Ethiopian people, too, know it well.

ምንደኞቹ ግን ራሳቸውን የሚያውቁ አይመስለንም።

However we don't think the hired ones know themselves.

ሕጋዊ ድርጅቶችንና ግለሰብ ጋዜጠኞችን በስም እየጠቀሱ የሚያፈስሱት መሠረተቢስ አሉባልታ ከአለቆቻቸው የተሰጣቸው ተልእኮና ግዴታ መሆኑን አንስተውም።

We don't miss the fact that the malicious gossip they spread mentioning legal organizations and journalists by name has been the mission and duty they were given from their bosses.      

አቅጣጫቸው ግን በፕሮፓጋንዳና በኃይልም በመረባረብ ነፃውን ፕሬስ ማፍረስ መሆኑን ሕዝቡና ለዴሞክራሲ ቆመናል የሚሉ ወገኖች ሁሉ ከወዲሁ ሊያውቁት ይገባል።

Their direction is towards destroying the free press through propaganda as well as using force, so fellow people who say that they stand for the people and democracy, should know it in advance. 

ያለነፃ ፕሬስ ዴሞክራሲ የሚታሰብ አይደለም።

It is impossible to think of democracy without free press.

ነፃ ፕሬስን እያፈኑና እያዳከሙ ዴሞክራትነትን ማረጋገጥ አይቻልም።

It's not possible to prove being a democrat suppressing and weakening the free press. 

ከጦቢያ ጥቅምት 20 ቀን 1990

From Tobia October 30, 1997
