

       አረንጓዴው ጐርፍ እየነጠፈ ነው-ብቸኛው ጀግና በለስ ከቀናቸው ኬንያውያን ጋር ግብ ግብ ገጥሟል

The Green Flood is drying-up – The sole Hero is Facing a Great Challenge against Lucky-Winning Kenyans 

  ጀግናው አትሌት ሻምበል አበበ በቂላ በሮም ኦሊምፒክ ድል ከተቀዳጀበት ጀምሮ የኢትዮጵያውያን መታወቂያ የሆነው የአትሌቲክስ ስፖርት እየተዳከመ አረንጓዴው ጐርፍ በመንጠፍ ላይ በሚገኝበት በአሁኑ ወቅት ብቸኛው ጀግና ኃይሌ ገብረ ሥላሴ በለስ ከቀናቸው ከኬንያ አትሌቶች ጋር ግብ ግብ ገጥሟል።

Since the heroic athlete captain Abebe Bikila came out victorious in Rome Olympic, athletics has become the identity card of Ethiopians, but lately weakened and while the Green Flood was on its way to dry-up, the sole hero Haile Gebreselassie is at present facing a great challenge against the lucky-winning Kenyans. 

  የኢትዮጵያ እንቁ ልጅ ባለፈው ማክሰኞ በጀርመን ኮለን ከተማ ባካሄደው የ5,00 ሜትር ውድድር በ12 ደቂቃ ከ55.4 ሰኮንድ በመጨረስ አንደኛ ሆኗል።

Last Tuesday, Ethiopia's jewel in Germany, Colon city, in a 5,000 meter race, he stood first in 12 minutes 55.4 seconds.

በዚህ ውድድር ዳንኤል ኮመን ባይወዳደርም አራት ኬኒያውያኖች ኃይሌን ተፈታትነውታል።

Although Daniel Comen didn't compete in this race four other Kenyans challenged Haile. 

ከነዚሁ ኬኒያውያኖች ፖል ኮችና ቶም ኒያርክ ሁለተኛና ሦስተኛ ሆነዋል።

Out of these Kenyans, Paul Coch and Tom Niyark come out second and third.

ይህንኑ ውድድር አስመልክቶ የሮይተር ዘጋቢ በሰጠው አስተያየት "ኃይሌ በጀርመን ዋና ከተማ ምን እንደሚያደርግ በትክክል ያውቃል።

In the suggestion he gave the Reuters' reporter said, "Haile knows exactly what he does in Germany Capital.

በ5,00 ሜትር ሩጫ ተወዳድሮ የተነጠቀውን ክብረወሰን ለማስመለስ ይሞክራል።

He'll attempt to bring back the record he was snatched from his in 5,000 meter race."

በማለት መናገሩ ይታወሳል።

Said, it was to be recalled.

ወጣቱ ኮመንም የኃይሌም ኃያል አትሌትነት አልሸሸገም።

The young Comen too didn't hide Haile's great athleticism.

በብራሰልስ ግራንፕሪ ውድድር በኃይሌ የተያዘውን ክብረወሰን ከተረከበ በኋላ "የኔን ሪኮርድ መውሰድ የሚችል ሰው ኃይሌ ብቻ ነው የሚሆነው።

After breaking the record held by Haile in Brussels, Greenpree, "The person who can break my record is going to be only Haile. 

ይኼም ቢሆን አያሳስበኝም።

And this doesn't worry me.

አሁንም ገና ታዳጊ ወጣት ነኝ።

I am still a growing youth. 

ተጨማሪ ሪኮርዶችን ለመስበር በጣም ሰፊ ጊዜ አለኝ።

I have much time to break additional records."

ብሏል።

He said.

በዚሁ ግራንፕሪ ውድድር ኃይሌ የ10,00 ሜትር ክብረወሰን ተነጥቋል።

In this Greenpree race Haile was snatched his 10,000 meters record.

በ10,00 ሜትር የኃይሌን ክብረወሰን የነጠቀው ኬንያዊው ፖውል ቴርጋት ነው።

The one who snatched Haile's 10,000 meters record was Paul Tergat of Kenya.

የኬንያውያን ድል ይህ ብቻ አይደለም።

The victories of Kenyans were not only these.

በ5,00 ሜትር ቶማስ ኢታርክ በ10,00 ሜትር ፖውል ኮች የሁለተኛ ደረጃ ከማስመዝገባቸውም በላይ ኬንያውያን በወንዶች 800 ሜትር እና በ3,00 ሜትር መሰናክል የክብረወሰን ባለቤት ሆነዋል።

Apart from registering second place in 5,000 and 10,000 meters by Thomas Itark and Paul Kochi, respectively, the Kenyans have become record holders in men's 800 and 3,000 meters.

ጀግናው አትሌት ባልተሳተፈበት ውድድር ሁለት ክብረወሰኖችን ቢነጠቅም በ3000 ሜትር ውድድር ድል ተቀዳጅቷል።

While in a race he didn't compete he was snatched two records, in 3000 meters he became victorious.

ኃይሌ በዚህ ውድድር ድል የተቀዳጀው በ7 ደቂቃ ከ26.2 ሴኮንድ በመጨረስ ነው።

He stood victorious in this race finishing in 7 minutes 26.2 second.

  በአሁኑ ወቅት "አንድ ለናቱ" የሚል ቅጽል ስም የተሰጠው የኢትዮጱያ እንቁ ልጅ ከጦቢያ ጋዜጣ ጋር ባደረገው ቃለ ምልልስ የክብረወሰንን መነጣጠቅ አስመልክቶ በሰጠው አስታያየት "ትግል ላይ ነው ያለሁት።

The Ethiopian jewel and who, at this time is given a name "one for its mother", have given an interview to Tobia newspaper with regards to the snatching of records, which he said "I am in a struggle. 

በአትሌቲክስም ሆነ በሌላው አንዴ ክብረወሰን ትሰብራለህ ሌላ ጊዜ ይሰበርብሃል።

In athletics or any other race you break one record at one time, and it would be snatched from you at another time.  

የአትሌቲክስ ውድድር የትግል ሂደት ዓይነት ስለሆነ በዚሁ ሁኔታ ነው የምንቀጥለው።

Since the athletics competition is like a process of struggle, it's in this kind of situation that we continue. 

አቅሜ እስከፈቀደ ድረስ ክብረወሰን ተሰብሮብኛል ብዬ እግሬን ሰብስቤ አልቀመጥም።

As far as I can, I wouldn't sit idly because one record is being snatched from me.

እስከቻልኩ ድረስ ትግሌን በመቀጠል ድሉን ለማስመለስ ጥረት አደርጋለሁ" ብሏል።

As long as I possibly could, continuing my struggle, I will make effort to bring back the victory," he said.

እንዳለውም በትግል ላይ ይገኛል።

And as he said, he's in a struggle. 

                   ከጦቢያ አራተኛ ዓመት ቁጥር 35 ነሐሴ 22 ቀን 1989

                    From Tobia, 4th year No. 35 August 28, 1997 
