

                        አቡነ ገብሬል ከሰው እንዳይገናኙ ተከለከሉ

                    Abune Gabriel is Forbidden to meet People

  ብጹዕ አቡነ ገብሬል የቅዱስ ሲኖዶስ አባልና የምዕራብ ሸዋ ሀገረ ስብከት ሊቀጰጳስ በከፍተኛ ደረጃ ተቃውሞ እየደረሰባቸው ያሉት ፓትርያርክ ጳውሎስ «ይቅር ባይ ሆነው ከእግዚአብሔርና ከምዕመናን ጋር እንዲታረቁና በእጃቸው ያደረጉትን የሲኖዶስ ሥልጣን እንዲመልሱ» መንፈሳዊ ጥሪ በማቅረባቸው ከመስከረም 23 ቀን 1990 ዓ.ም ጀምሮ ምግብ ከውጭ እንዳይገባላቸው ከዘመዶቻቸውና ከባለጉዳይም ጋር እንዳይገናኙ ማዕቀብ የተደረገባቸው መሆኑን ውስጥ አዋቂ ምንጮች አስታወቁ አቡኑ መስከረም 22 ቀን 1990 ዓ.ም ለንባብ በበቃው መብሩክ ጋዜጣ 2ኛ ዓመት ቁጥር 52/104 ላይ ያቀረቡት ይኸው ባለ6 ገጽ የእርቅ ጥሪ የኢትዮጵያ ኦርቶዶክስ ቤተክርስቲያንን አጠቃላይ ችግር የዳሰሰና ባለሰባት ነጥብ መፍትሔም የጠቆመ እንደነበር ምንጮቹ ጠቅሰዋል።

Beatitude Bishop Gabriel member of the Holy Synod and Archbishop of the west Shewa Office of National Preaching due to his request for warded to the Patriarch Paulos "to have mercy and reconciliation with God and the laity, return the Holy Synod power you held" was forbidden to get access of food from outside and not to meet with families and other people as from October 1, 1998, internal sources disclosed; Mebruk newspaper in its 30the of September, 1998 edition, 2nd year No. 52/104, has the 6 page text of the bishop's call for negotiation, which was said to discuss at length the overall problems of the Orthodox church and had a 7-point remedial suggestions, the sources disclosed. 

  እነዚህም፦

These are:

  1. ቅዱስነትዎ ያለ በደል ታስረው እንደነበረ አስታውሰው በእርስዎ ግፊት ታሰርን የሚሉትን ለመንግሥት ነግረው እንዲፈቱ ቢያደርጉ፣

  1. Your Holiness, remembering that you were imprisoned unjustly, let you remind the      government to release those who were arrested through your pressure; 

  2. ቅዱስነትዎ ያለምንም በደል በ1974 ዓ.ም ከሥራ ታግደውና ጡረታ ወጥተው እንደነበር በማስታወስ ከጠቅላይ ቤተክህነትና ከየቤተክርስቲያኑ ያለፍትህ ከሥራ የተባረሩትን ሊቃውንት፣ ካህናትንና ሠራተኞችን በርህራሄ መንፈስ ወደ ሥራቸው እንዲመለሱ ቢያደርጉ፣

  2. Your Holiness, remembering that you were sacked from work and retired in 1982 unjustly, let       you sympathetically bring back to work those wise people, priests and workers who were          sacked from their job with out doing any harm in the office of the clergy and in various           churches;

  3. በአገር አቀፍና በዓለም አቀፍ ደረጃ ቤተክርስቲያናችንን በእጅጉ ያስነቀፈ ከሁለት ዓመት በፊት በሁለት ቋንቋ የታተመው የሃይማኖትና የቀኖና መጽሐፍ በእንግሊዝኛው ክፍል በገጽ 15 «እግዚአብሔር በመለኮትና በባህርይ ሦስት ነው» ተብሎ ተጽፎ መውጣት ብዙ ውግዘትን ያስከተለ በመሆኑ በአስቸኳይ ይታረም፤ ታርሞ ከሆነ ደግሞ በቂ ማብራሪያ በሬዲዮ በቴሌቪዥንና በጋዜጣ ይነገር።

  3. The Book of Religious Dogma that was published two years ago in two languages which has      brought great criticisms to our church, in page 15 of the English version says, "God is      three in divinity and character" an since this brought about great condemnation, let it be      urgently corrected; an if it has already been corrected let enough explanation be given      on the radio, television and newspaper. 

ቀደም ብሎ የታተመው መጽሐፍም ይሰብሰብ፣

Let the formerly published book be gathered;

  4. ሚያዝያ 30 ቀን 1988 ዓ.ም የጸደቀው የሲኖዶስ ሕግ፣ በምዕራፍ 8፣ በአንቀጽ 23 ላይ ያለው የቅዱስ ሲኖዶስን መብት የገፈፈ፣ የመንፈስ ቅዱስን ሥልጣን የተጋፋ ሥርዋጽ ሕግ በምልዓተ ጉባዔ ውሳኔ እንዲሰረዝና ቅዱስነትዎም በእጅ ያደረጉትን የሲኖዶስ ሥልጣን ለሲኖዶስ ይመልሱ፣

  4. The Holy Synod legislation that was approved on May 8, 1996, in chapter 8, Article 23,           divested the rights of the Holy Synod, abused the power of the Holy Spirit and so be             cancelled and your holiness return the Holy Synod power you took;

  5. የሊቃነ ጳጳሳቱን፣ የሊቃውንቱን፣ የካህናቱንና የዲያቆናቱን እንዲሁም የምዕመናኑን መብት መጠበቁን በበላይነት የሚመለከትና የሚቆጣጠር የቅዱስ ሲኖዶስ ጽ/ቤት ይከፈት፣

  5. Let an office be opened that overlooks and controls the archbishops, wish people, priests and      deacons as well as the rights of the laity are respected;   

  6. በሐዋርያት ሕግ መሠረት ቤተክርስቲያንን በበላይነት የሚመራ፣ ፓትርያርኩም ከአምባገነን ሥልጣን ተላቅቆ በሐዋርያትና በአበው ሕግና ሥርዓት መሠረት በቅዱስ ሲኖዶስ ተወስኖ የተሰጠውን የሥራ ድርሻ ብቻ እንዲሠራ የሚያደርግ አዲስ የሲኖዶስ ሕግ እንዲረቀቅና ብሎም እንዲጸድቅ በምላተ ጉባዔ አርቃቂ ኮሚቴ ይቋቋም፣

  6. Let a new Synodic law be drafted by the General Assembly Drafting committee and then          approved that would make the patriarch work in accordance to the law of the apostles and        wise men, so that it can make the patriarch withdraw from a dictatorial power and only be        limited to the power bestowed upon the holy synod;   

  7. አምስት ዓመት ሙሉ ቤተክርስቲያናችንን ያስነቀፉ መጥፎ ድርጊቶች እንዳይደገሙ፣ የልዩ ልዩ ጋዜጣ አንባቢዎችም መሳቂያ የሆንንበት መጥፎ ጊዜ እንዲያበቃ የሰላምና የእርቅ ዓቢይ ጉባዔ ይደረግ።

  7. Let the activities that had, for five years, brought about criticisms not be repeated;  and let       us not be, any more, laughing stocks of readers of various newspapers, and let a main          peace and reconciliation conference be conducted. 

በዚያ ጉባዔ እንወቃቀስ፣ እንነጋገር፣ እንታረቅ።

Let us reprimand one another; let's discuss; let's reconcile, in that conference. 

ይህንንም ለማድረግ እግዚአብሔር ይርዳን አሜን» የሚሉ ነበሩ።

Let God helps us to do this, Amen," they were saying.

  እንደሌሎቹ ጳጳሳት መኖሪያቸውንና ቢሮአቸውን በጠቅላይ ቤተክህነት ያደረጉት አቡነ ገብሬል በዚህ ጥሪያቸው ማግስት ከአርብ ከሰዓት በኋላ ጀምሮ ምሳና ራት ተከልክለውና ባለጉዳይም እንዳይገናኛቸው ከበር ላይ በሚገኙ የጥበቃ ሠራተኞች እገዳ እንደተጣለባቸው የጠቀሱት እነዚሁ ምንጮች ቅዳሜ ዕለትም በቅርብ ይረዳቸው የነበረ ዲያቆን እሳቸው ዘንድ እንዳይገባ መከልከሉን አስረድተዋል።

Bishop Gabriel who made his home and office in the Headquarter of the Office of clergy just like the others, on the morrow of this call of his, that is, as from Friday afternoon, he was forbidden lunch and diner, and those with cases were not able to meet him, for the security workers at the gate couldn't let them pass, as this sources disclosed, the deacon who closely help him was also forbidden to get in to his room, they explained.

  አቡነ ገብሬል ባለፈው ዓመት ጥር ወር ላይም በጠቅላይ ቤተክህነት ተደርጐ የነበረው ጉባዔ ሂደት ከቤተክርስቲያኒቱ መንፈሳዊ ተልዕኮ ውጭ ነው ብለው ጉባዔውን ረግጠው በመውጣታቸው ላንድ ወር ያህል ከሰው ጋር እንዳይገናኙ ተመሳሳይ ማዕቀብ ተደርጐባቸው እንደነበር ታውቋል።

It's to be recalled that last year in January, bishop Gabriel had a similar sanction for a almost a month not to meet people for he went out of an assembly meeting saying that the process of the meeting was out of the mission of the church.

በወቅቱ አቡነ ገብሬል ሁኔታው የማይሻሻልላቸው ከሆን ከግቢው እንደሚወጡ ለፓትርያርኩ በደብዳቤ በማሳወቃቸው እገዳው እንደተነሳላቸው ተመልክቷል።

At that time bishop Gabriel disclosed in writing to the Patriarch that unless the situation gets improved he would altogether leave the premise, so the sanction had been lifted.  

  አቡነ ገብሬል ምግብ ከውጭ እንዳይገባላቸው ታግዶ ከባለጉዳዮች እነዳይገናኙ መደረጉ ሰባዊ መብታቸውን የሚዳፈርና ከቤተክርስቲያኒቱ ቀኖና ውጭም እንደሆነ የገለጡት እነዚሁ ምንጮች በእኝህ መንፈሳዊ አባት ላይ በስውር የተላለፈው ማዕቀብ እንዲነሳ ምዕመናንና የሰባዊ መብት ተሟጋች ድርጅቶች የየበኩላቸውን ግፊት እንዲያደርጉ ጥሪ አቅርበዋል።

The sources who mentioned that it was violating the bishop's human rights and out of the dogma of the church to forbid the intrace of food form outside and talking of individuals with cases, called for the laity and human rights organizations to put pressure to lift the sanction that was passed in secret on this spiritual father.   

ከጦቢያ መስከረም 29 ቀን 1990

From Tobia October 9, 1997
