

                                ርዕሰ አንቀጽ፦
                            የብሔራዊ እርቅ ዋጋና ፋይዳ

                                   Editorial
              The Value and Importance of National Reconciliation

  በአገራችን ሀሳብን በጥሞና ተወያይቶ፣ ልዩነትን በመቻቻል መፍታት ወይም ላለመስማማት መስማማት አልተለመደም።

In our country, discussing ideas calmly, resolving differences through tolerance or agreeing to disagree has not been a common experience.

ተፈጥሮአችን ነው ማለት ባይቻልም በባህላችን ኋላቀርነት ምክንያት መሸነፍን በፀጋ መቀበል አልለመደብንም።

While it is not possible to say it is from our nature, we are not used to accept defeat willfully due to our cultural backwardness.

ከሁለት ግለሰቦች ጀምሮ በሀሳብ ልዩነት የተነሳ ለመቧቀስ ቅድሚያ የምንሰጠው ሆኗል።

Starting from two individuals we give precedence to resolve our difference of opinions through the physical tackle.

ይህ አካሄድ ከግለሰብ እስከ ፖለቲካ ድርጅቶች የዘለቀ የአስተሳሰባችን ጥቁር ነጥብ ነው ማለት ይቻላል።

This kind of practice could be said a black spot of our thinking that went deeper from individual to political organization.

ይህም በመሆኑ የጠመንጃን ባህልና ድህነትን ታቅፈን ዝንተ ዓለም እንንፋቀቃለን።

Consequently we are dragging ourselves along the ground embracing, the culture of guns and poverty.

በግለሰቦች፣ በማኅበረሰቦች፣ በአገሮች፣ በፖለቲካ ፓርቲዎች መካከል የሀሳብ ልዩነት ያለ ነው።

It's common to have differences of opinions in individuals, communities, countries, political parties.

እኛ ስናደርገው እንደኖርነውና አሁንም አዝማሚያችን እንደሚያመለክተው በእነዚህ ማኅበራዊ ኃይሎች መካከል ያለው ቅራኔ በኃይል ይፈታ ቢባል ዓለም ምን ዓይነት ትርምስምስ ሁኔታ ውስጥ እንደምትገባ መገመት አያዳግትም።

If the contradiction among these social forces were to be resolved through force, as we've been used to for long, and are inclined to do now, it's not difficult to estimate in what kind of turmoil the world would get in.

ከእንደዚህ ያለው ምስቅልቅል ሁኔታ ውስጥ እንዳንገባ ነው በአገራችንም የግጭት በር መዘጋት አለበት የምንለው።

That's why we say the way of contradiction should be abandoned in order for us not to get in to such kind of disorderly situation. 

የፖለቲካ ልዩነቶቻችን በተቻችሎ መኖርና በብሔራዊ እርቅ መንፈስ መፈታት አለባቸው የሚል ሀሳብ የምናራምደው።

That's why we say our political differences should be resolved though the spirit of tolerance and national reconciliation. 

በዚህ ደግሞ አትራፊዎች እንጂ ተጐጂዎች አይደለንም።

And we benefit, not lose, as a result. 

ልዩነትን በግጭትና በጠመንጃ የመፍታት ባህላችን በእጅጉ ጐድቶናል።

Resolving differences through the culture of clashes and guns have hurt us deeply. 

በተለይ በአንድ አገር ልጆች መካከል የሚካሄድ ግጭት የሚበላው የአገሪቱን ሀብት ብቻ አይደለም።

Especially the clash that's been among children of one nation consumes not only the country's wealth.

በጊዜ ሂደት የተገነቡ የዕድገት ውጤቶችን ብቻም አይደለም።

And not only development fruits that came about through time.  

በሕብረተሰብ ግንባታና አገር ልማት ቀዳሚ ሚና ያለው ወጣትና አምራች ኃይልም በጦርነት ይመሽካል።

But it is also the youth who is the productive force and has a prior role in the construction of community and development of a country that would be devastated.

በሰላም መታጣት የዜጐች የመኖር ተስፋ ይጨልማል።

Due to the absence of peace, the hope of civilians to live would be obscured.  

ከድህነት ወደባሰ ድህነት እንዘቅጣለን

We would move from poverty to the abyss of poverty.

ይህን አካሄድና ያስከተለውንም ጥፋት ባለፉት ሰላሣ ዓመታት በዓይናችን አይተነዋል።

We saw in our eyes this practice and its consequences for the last thirty years.

አልፈንበታልም።

We went through it.

የአገር አንድነትን ለማስጠበቅ የተከፈለው መስዋዕትነት አንድ ትውልድ ለሚኖርባት አገሩ የሚከፍለው ዋጋ ነው ብንል እንኳ በፖለቲካ ልዩነቶች ምክንያት የጠፋው የአገሪቱ ልጆች ሕይወት የትና የት ነው።

If we just say the sacrifice that was paid to defend the unity of the country is the price one generation would pay to the country it lives in, the loss of the lives of the children of the country due to political differences is countless.  

ቀይና ነጭ ሽብር በተባለው የአገራችን አስከፊ ክስተት የጠፋው አንድ ትውልድ ነው።

It was a generation that perished due to the disgusting so-called white and red terror.

ይህ ትውልድ ደግሞ ወጣት፣ አምራችና ባለጉልበት ብቻ ሳይሆን በግንዛቤው የላቀ፣ «ይህ ለምን ይሆናል?

This generation was young, and not only productive and full of strength but also that excelled in its understanding, "why did this happen? 

» ብሎ የሚጠይቅ፣ ለዴሞክራሲያዊ ባህል መጐልበት ሠፊ አስተዋጾ ማበርከት የሚችል ባለብሩህ አእምሮ ነበር።

"It used to ask; it was one who was bright and who could widely contribute for the strengthening of democratic culture. 

በዚሁ በነጭና በቀይ ሽብር ዳፋ ዛሬ ከዚሁ ከተማረውና ነቃ ከተባለው ወገን የሆኑ ሺ በሺዎች እስር ቤት ናቸው።

As a result of these white and red terrors, there are now many behind bars who were from these elite and that were believed to be active groups.  

  ዛሬም፣ ነገም መጠያየቃችን ይቀጥል ከተባለ የጦር መሣሪያ አንስተው የአገሪቱን አንድነት ያፈረሱ፣ የጐሣ ፖለቲካ ምዕራፍ ከፍተው ሕዝብ ያፋጁ፣ ለሥልጣናቸው ሲሉ ተቀናቃኞቻቸውንና የትግል ጓዶቻቸውን በየጫካው ሲደፉ የኖሩ፣ በጠራራ ፀሐይ ሰዎችን ሲያስገድሉና ሲገድሉ የነበሩት ሁሉ መጠየቅ ሊኖርባቸው ነው።

If our queries are to continue today and tomorrow, all who have, through guns, destroyed the unity of the country, opened a chapter of racial politics and caused to destroy one another, killed their comrades and opponents in the struggle in the bushes, killed and have people killed in broad day light are to be brought to justice.

የትናንቱ ጥፋት ለዛሬው ቡራኬ አይሰጥም።

The yesterday's destruction cannot give blessing for today.  

ይልቁንም የዛሬዎቹ ገዥዎች ከጅምሩ እንዳሉን የቀይ ሽብር ወንጀለኞች የሚጠየቁት ዳግመኛ በዚህች አገር የማንም ዜጋ ነፍስ ያለ ሕጋዊ ሥርዓት እንዳታልፍ ለትምህርት ሰጭነቱ ነበር።

In fact, as today's leaders told us from the outset, that criminals of red terror are put to justice so that it would teach a lesson that no one's life ever in this country would pass without legal order. 

ዛሬ እነዚህ ሰዎች ይህንን ቃል የሚደግሙበት አንደበት የላቸውም።

Today, these people have no gut and courage to repeat these phrases.     

የበደኖን፣የወተርን፣ የአረካን፣ የመስጊድን፣ የዩኒቨርሲቲን፣ የአደባባይ ኢየሱስን ጨፍጫፊዎች፣ የአሰፋ ማሩን ረሻኞች ለፍርድ አላቀረቡም።

They don't put to justice criminals of Bedeno's, water's, Areka's, Mosque's, Universities, Jesus square's cases and assassinators of Asefa Maru. 

በአገሪቱ ብሔራዊ ዕርቅ ይስፈን ስንል ተራ ነፍሰ ገዳዮች አይጠየቁ አለማለታችን እንደሆነ ግንዛቤ ሊያገኝ ይገባዋል።

When we say let national reconciliation reign in the country, it should be understood that we're not saying that ordinary criminals sight not to be put to justice.

ቢያንስ ግን ተጨማሪ ጥፋት ከመከተሉ በፊት በፖለቲካ ኃይሎች መካከል ያለው ፍጥጫ ረግቦ ለመነጋገር ዕድሉ ይኑር፣ በሩ ይከፈት ማለታችን ነው።

But at least, before additional destruction is followed, let the confrontation of political forces slack off and let there be a chance to discuss; we mean let the door open. 

በመክፈቻ ዜናችን እንደተዘገበው በአገራችን የፖለቲካው አየር በቅራኔዎች ተወጥሯል።

As it's started in our opening news the political air has been tightened with contradictions.  

በመሪዎችና በተመሪዎች፣ በመሪዎች በራሳቸው ውስጥ፣ በመሪ የፖለቲካ ድርጅቱና በተቃዋሚ ኃይሎች መካከል የፈጠጠ ቅራኔ አለ።

There's a naked contradiction between leaders and followers, among leadership itself, and between the incumbent and opposition parties. 

በብዙ አካባቢዎችም ቅራኔው ወደ ወታደራዊ ግጭት እየተሸጋገረ መሆኑ ይታወቃል።

In most places the contradiction is transforming to military clash.

ወደተጨማሪ ጥፋት እያመራን ነው ማለት ነው።

We are heading towards destruction. 

  ከማንም በላይ ዛሬ ለብሔራዊ እርቅና ለመቻቻል ፖለቲካ ሌት ተቀን መሥራት ያለበት በሥልጣን ላይ ያለው መንግሥት፣ የመንግሥቱ ዋልታ የሆነው የፖለቲካ ድርጅትና መላ አባላቱ ናቸው።

For national reconciliation and political tolerance more than anyone else, it is the government in power, the political organization which is the basis of the government and its all members that shoud work day and night.  

ለዚህ ምክንያት አለው።

For this it has a reason.

ይህ መንግሥትና ደጋፊዎቹ ሠላማዊ የሥልጣን ሽግግርን ማምጣትና ማስለመድም አለባቸው።

This government and its supporters should bring about and familiarize peaceful transition power. 

ይህ ሳይሆን ቀርቶ ችግር ቢከተል የመጀመሪያ ተጐጂዎች እነሱ ናቸው።

If this didn't happen, the first to be hurt would be them.

በኃይል መሸነፍ የሚያመጣውን ጣጣ ባለፈው ሥርዓት ሰዎች ያዩት ይመስለናል።

We think they have seen the trouble the act of being defeated by force could bring about from the previous regime.  

እንደመንግሥትነታቸው የኅብረተሰቡን ሰላም በኃይል ሳይሆን በሥልት የመጠበቅ ኃላፊነትም አለባቸው።

As a government, they have the responsibility of keeping the peace of the community not with force but with knack.

  ብሔራዊ ዕርቅን አስፈላጊ የሚያደርገው ሌላው ምክንያት ኋላቀርነታችንና ተባብረን ድህነትን የመርታት አስፈላጊነት ብቻም አይደለም።

The other reason that makes national reconciliation necessary is not only our backwardness and the necessity of our cooperation to defeat poverty. 

እንደሚታወቀው የወቅቱ ፖለቲካ ምህዋር (ማዕከላዊ መሽከርከሪያ) የትግራይን ሕዝብ ብሶት ይዤ ተነስቻለሁ የሚለው ሕወሀት ነው።

It's known that it's TPLF which is the prevalent political orbit (central wheel) that claims to have started its struggle holding the complaints of the Tigrean people.  

ቡድኑ የመላው የትግራይ ሕዝብ ድጋፍ ያለው መሆኑ አጠራጣሪ ቢሆንም ከጅምሩ ባነሳው ጠባብ ስሜት መነሻነት ባለፉት ስድስት ዓመታት የትግርኛ ተናጋሪዎች የበላይነት በጉልህ በመታየቱ «እኛ - እነሱ» የሚል፣ ሕዝብ በሁለት ዐቢይ ጐራ የመከፈል (ሞቌቆሶብቃቲሶቨቃቌቋ) አደገኛ አዝማሚያ ተፈጥሯል።

Whether the group has a support of all the Tigrean people is doubtful but due to the narrow cause it has, the superiority of Tigrina speakers was clearly demonstrated for the last six years, and hence, "We-They" kind-of-saying dividing people in to two category, which is a dangerous tendency has been created.  

ይህ ለቀጣዩ ትውልድ የሚተርፍ አደገኛ አካሄድ ነው።

This is a dangerous tendency that could pass on to the next generation.

ስለዚህ በጥቂቶች አራማጅነት የተረጨብን በሽታ በትግራይ ሕዝብ ትግል፣ የኃላፊነት ስሜት ባላቸው የሕወሀት አመራር አባላት፣ በመላው ተቃዋሚ ኃይሎችና በእርዳታ ሠጭ አገሮች የጋራ ጥረት በአጭሩ ሊቀጭ ይገባል።

Therefore, the disease that has been widespread by few leadership should be stopped before long by the cooperative effort of the struggle of Tigrean people, responsible leadership of TPLF, all opposition forces and donor countries.   

የብሔራዊ ዕርቅ ዋጋና ፋይዳ በጉልህ የሚታየውም ያን ጊዜ ነው።

The value and importance of national reconciliation would be clearly seen only then. 


ከጦቢያ መስከረም 15 ቀን 1990

From Tobia September 25, 1997
