

                                ርእሰ አንቀጽ፦

                                Editorial

                        ጐደላቸው ወይስ ወትሮውንም አልነበራቸውም?

            Have They Missed it Now or Were They not Having It Even Before? 

  ባለፈው ሳምንት በወጣው ጦቢያ መጽሔት ላይ የጦቢያ መጽሔት ቋሚ አምደኛ እንደገለጠውና ከአጠቃላይ ሁኔታዎች መገንዘብ እንደሚቻለው በዚህ አገር በአዲሱ ሥርዓት የተጀመረው የጐሣ ፖለቲካ ልዩ ልዩ ቅርጾችንና ይዘቶችን እየያዘ ሄዶአል።

According to the regular columnist expression in last week's Tobia magazine, and taking cognizance of the general situation, the tribal politics that has started in this country in the new order is heading towards having different forms and contents.

የሥርዓቱ አስፋፊዎች ብዙ ጊዜ የሚጠቀሙት «ብሔር፣ ብሔረሰብ፣ ሕዝቦች በራሳቸው ቋንቋ እንዲማሩ፣ በራሳቸው ቋንቋ እንዲዳኙ፣ ባሕላቸውን እንዲያዳብሩ፣ እንዲጠብቁና ራሳቸውን እንዲያስተዳድሩ» የሚለውን አጓጊና መልካም የሚመስል ለስላሳ አነጋገር ነው።

The disseminators of this regiment most often use these tantalizing and seemingly good, soft words and phrases, "nation, nationality, to enable people learn in their own language, to make them judged by their own language, to develop and preserve their culture, to administer themselves." 

በመሠረቱ የሕዝብ መብት መከበር ተገቢ ነው።

Basically, it's appropriate to respect people's rights.  

አንድ ሕዝብ በቋንቋው ቢናገር፣ በባህልና በታሪኩ ቢኮራ፣ ራሱን ቢያስተዳድር ማንን ያስከፋል?

Who would be defected if one speaks with its own language, if one becomes proud of one's culture and history, if one administers oneself?

የሚያሳዝነው ግን በዚህ ውብ ሀሳብ ጠለላነት በሕዝብ መካከል ጥላቻ ሲነዛ፣ በግርግሩም ብዙ የሚባልለት ሕዝብ ሳይሆን ጥቂቶች ተጠቃሚ ሲሆኑ ነው

What is saddening, however, is the diffusion of hatred among people under the cover of this beautiful idea; in the confusion, rather than the people, as was propagated, the beneficiaries are few. 

  የወቅቱ አካሄዳችን እውነተኛ ገጽታና ትክክለኛ መሸፈኛው እየተገለጠ ሲሄድ ለዚህ ሕዝብ ያለው የመከፋፈል እቅድ ግልጽ ሆኖአል።

When the true picture and the right cover of our present working procedure is unfolded, the plan of division it has for this people has become clear.  

ጐን ለጐን የሚኖር፣ ዕድሉ የተቆራኘና ለዚህ አገር እድገት አብሮ የተጠመደ ሕዝብ አንድነትና ግንኙነት እንዲፍረከረክ የተጠነሰሰው ሴራ ይፋ ይሆን ዘንድ ረዥም ጊዜና ብዙ ድካም አልጠየቀም።

The plot to unbind the unity of these people who live side by side, whose fate is interwoven and people who work together for the development of its country, didn't take long time and effort to be uncovered.  

ስለዚህ እዚህ ደረጃ ላይ ከደረሰን በኋላ ደግሞ አዲስ ዙር የዘመቻ ግንባር የተከፈተ ይመስላል።

So, after we have reached here, it seems that a new round campaign is opened.  

  ወትሮውንም የክልል ምሥረታው ፍልስፍና፣ የጐሣው ፖለቲካ መንጠላጠያ አሳብ ወደ ዘረኝነት እንዳያመራ አስግቶ ነበር።

Even at the outset, the philosophy of regional establishment, which was the promotion ladder for tribal politics, was feared that it would lead to racism.  

ለአንድነት የቆሙ የነፃው ፕሬስ ቤተሰቦች ሲዋጉ የቆዩትም ይህንኑ አዝማሚያ ነው።

The free press families who stood for unity were fighting this tendency.  

በጦቢያ መጽሔት ላይ እንደተመለከተው ደግሞ በተወሰኑ የገዥው መደብ አባሎች ዘንድ እንደ ፖለቲካ ርእዮተ ዓለም እየተቆጠረና ወደዚያም እየተገፋ ነው።

As it has been indicated in the Tobia magazine, it is being considered as political ideology and trying to push it forward by certain members of the ruling party. 

ይህ የብዙሃኑ ትግርኛ ተናጋሪ ሕዝብ አመለካከትና እምነት ባይሆንም ጐርፉ እየተጠረቃቀመ ከሄደ አደገኛነቱ አይጠረጠርም።

Although this is not the outlook and belief of most of the Tigrina-speaking people, its risk would be great if the flood increases.  

አደገኛነቱም ለጠቅላላው ሕብረተሰብና በተለይም ጥቂቶች በስሙ ለሚነግዱበት «ብሔረሰብና ብሔር» ነው

አንድ ሕዝብ ቋንቋው፣ ማንነቱ፣ ሃይማኖቱና ታሪኩ የተከበሩና የታፈሩ መሆን አለባቸው ብለናል።

Its risk would be for the whole people; especially for those few who use the name of that "nationality and nation" We said the language; identity, religion and history of any people should be respected an honored.  

ለጠቅላላው ሕብረተሰብ ዕድገት እስከጠቀሙ ድረስ የአንድ ሕዝብ ልዩ መለያዎች እንደ ቅዱስ ባሕርያትም ሊታዩ ይገባል።

As long as they help for the development of all the people, the special identities of any people should be seen, even, like holy characteristics.  

የመንግሥትና የድርጅት ካድሬዎች የጐሰኝነት ቅስቀሳ ሳያባራ ተግባራዊ እንቅስቃሴዎች ክልላቸውን በማስፋት ከጐሰኝነት ወደ ዘረኝነት አዘንብለዋል።

Before the tribe agitation of government and party cadres subsides, practical activities broaden their scope from tribalism to racism. 

የተወሰነ ቋንቋ፣ የተወሰነ ጐሣና ሃይማኖት ላይ መንጠላጠል እየተያዘ ይመስላል።

It seems that there's a tendency of clinging to a certain language, certain tribe and religion.  

አንድ ቋንቋ ተናጋሪ አናሳ የሕዝብ ክፍል ሁሉን የሕብረተሰብ እንቅስቃሴ ለመምራትና ለመቆጣጠር የሚሮጥበትን ሁኔታ እናያለን።

We see the speaker of one language from a small community leading and controlling all the activities of the communities. 

በእጅጉ የሚያሳዝነው ደግሞ ትናንት ዘመናዊ ትምህርት ተምረናል ብለው ለሕዝብ መብት እንታገላለን ያሉ ዛሬ የዚህ ሂደት ተባባሪ ሆነው መገኘታቸው ነው።

What is very saddening is those who claimed that they've learnt modern education and said they would fight for people's right have been found cooperative to this process today. 

ሕዝብ የሚጠይቀው አጭር ጥያቄ «ለምን?» የሚል ሆኖአል።

The short question people ask "Why?" this is it.

ይህንንም ጥያቄ ሁላችንም ልንጠይቀውና ከዚህም በመነሣት ልንቋቋመው ይገባናል።

This question should be asked by all of us and in turn we should defend it.  

በበኩላችን አሁንም የዘር መበላለጥ፣ የጐሣ ፖለቲካና እያናረ የመጣውን አደገኛ አዝማሚያ ለሁላችንም አደገኛ ነውና በጋራ እንግታው እንላለን።

On our side, we say let's limit the racial hierarchy, tribal politics and the advancing tendency for its dangerous.  

ይህ አቅጣጫ ሕዝብን ከሕዝብ ጋር የሚያጋጭ፣ ለእልቂት የሚጋብዝና ለዚህ አገር ሰላም ጨርሶ ፀር የሆነ አዝማሚያ ነው።

This direction would clash people with people, invites destruction and it is dangerous tendency for the peace of this county.  

  ይህ የዘረኝነትና የጐሰኝነት አየር የተከበረውን የፕሬስ ሥራ እንሠራለን ብለው ከተሰለፉ አካባቢዎች ሲራገብ ስናይ ደግሞ ልባችን ይደማል።

When we see this racist and tribal air blowing from those areas who claim to live up with the honored press work, our heart bloods.    

የሞያው ሥነ ምግባር ዓለም አቀፍ ድንጋጌዎች በፕሬስ ሥራ ሕዝብን በጐሣና በኃይማኖት መከፋፈልን አጥብቀው ይከለክላሉ።

The ethics of the profession worldwide legislative decree highly forbids dividing people in tribe and religion in the work of the press.

እነዚህ ዓለም አቀፍ ክልከላዎች ትናንት ዘርና ጐሣ ሳይለዩ ለሠርቶ አደሩ ሕዝብ ቆመናል ይሉ በነበሩ ቅጥረኛና ውርጋጥ «ጸሐፊዎች» ሲጣሱ ስናይ እናዝናለን።

When we see these worldwide prohibitions are violated by employed whippier snapper "writers" who claimed yesterday that they stood for the entire working community, without differentiating race and tribe, become sorrowful.  

የመርህ ሰው የመሆን ሥነ ምግባር ጐደላቸው ወይስ ወትሮውንም አልነበራቸውም?

Have the missed the ethics of being principled or were they not having it even before?

እንላለን።

We say.

ለነገሩ መፍትሔው ግን ረጋ ያለ ፖለቲካና ሰላማዊ ዘመቻ መሆኑን ደጋግመን ለመግለጥ እንገደዳለን።

We would be forced to express repeatedly that the solution for it is clam political and peaceful campaign.

ምክንያቱም የዘረኞችን አቋም መልሶ በዘረኝነት፣ የእብሪትን ፖለቲካ በሌላ የእብሪትና ግንፍል ፖለቲካ መመከት ውጤቱ ጥፋት ከመሆን አይዘልልም ከጥቂት ዓመታት በፊት ሁለት ዋነኛ የመንግሥት መሪዎች ወደ ምሥራቅ ኢትዮጵያ በመሄድ የአንድን ጐሣ አዛውንቶች ሰብስበው ሕዝብ ሲያነሣሡ እንደነበረ ይታወሳል።

Because the result of defending racist stand with racism, the politics of arrogance with another arrogant and provocative politics would be destruction; 

It's to be recalled that a few years ago two main government leaders were instigating people by going and talking to one tribal leaders in eastern Ethiopia.  

አሁን ደግሞ ደቀ መዝሙሮቻቸው ያንኑ መዝሙር እየዘመሩ፣ ቅኝቱንም እያከረሩ ይገኛሉ።

And still today their followers are singing that same song, they're tuning it up.

በእኛ እምነት ከየትም የት የሚመጣ የዘር ፖለቲካና ዘረኝነት መወገዝ አለበት።

In our belief racial politics and racism, where ever it comes from, should be condemned.  

ይልቁንም ሕብረ ብሔራዊ የሆኑ የሕዝብ ክፍሎችና ተቃዋሚ ኃይሎች አምርረው ሊቋቋሙት የሚገባ ይህንን አዝማሚያ መሆን ይገባዋል።

In fact multi-national peoples' parties and opposition forces should withstand this tendency.       

ይህ ካልሆነ መዘዙ ብዙ ነው።

Otherwise, the result is dangerous.  

ከጦቢያ መስከረም 8 ቀን 1990

From Tobia September 18, 1997
