

                  ጅጅጋ ከተማ ለአንድ ቀን በተቀናሽ ወታደሮች ቁጥጥር ሥር ዋለች

     Jijiga town was for a day under the control of Soldiers who were given the Sack  

   በሶማሊ ብሔራዊ ክልላዊ መንግስት ሥር በሚገኙ በጅጅጋና በጐዴ ከተሞች፣ እንዲሁም በኦሮሚያ ክልል በቦረና ዞን አካባቢ ሰሞኑን በተፈጠረ ውጥረት በሰው ሕይወት ላይ የሞት አደጋ ሲደርስ ግምቱ በግልፅ ያልታወቀ ንብረት መውደሙን ከጋዜጣው ተባባሪ ሪፖርተሮችን ከረድኤት ድርጅቶች ከተገኘ መረጃ ለማወቅ ተችሏል። 

In Somali national administrative region, at Jijiga and Gode towns as well as Oromia region, around Borena Zone, in a tension created recently, there was a causality on one individual while a property, its estimation was not clearly known, was damaged, it was possible to know from associate reporters of the newspaper and donor organizations. 

በደረሱን ዘገባዎች መሠረት አሳሳቢዎቹ ሁኔታዎች የተከሰቱት ካለፈው ማክሰኞ ጀምሮ ሲሆን በአንዳንድ ቦታዎችም ችግሩ እስከ አሁን እልባት አላገኘም ተብሏል። 

According to the reports that reached us the pressing situations were created since last Tuesday, and in some places the problem hasn't been resolved, it was said.

በእነዚህ ሦስት አካባቢዎች የተፈጠሩትን ጉዳዮች የተመለከተው ዘገባ ሁኔታዎቹን ከፋፍሎ ተመልክቷቸዋል።

The report that covered the situations which occurred in these places divided them in to three.

   ባለፈው ማክሰኞ ጥር 14 ቀን 1994 የጅጅጋ ከተማ በተኩስ ስትናወጥ ከመዋልዋም ባሻገር በኢሕአዴግ መንግሥት ውስጥ አገልግሎት ሲስጡ ቆይተው የተቀነሱ ወታደሮች በወሰዱት የኃይል እርምጃ ከተማዋ ለአንድ ቀን በአማጺዎቹ ቁጥጥር ሥር ውላ እንደነበር ከረድኤት ድርጅቶችና ከዐይን ምስክሮች የደረሱ መረጃዎች አመልከተዋል።

Last Tuesday January 22, 2002 not only was Jijiga town troubled but also the town was put under the hands of the rebels who have been giving service in the EPRDF army but who later were sacked from their jobs and due to the forceful measures they took, the reports reached from eye witnesses and donor organizations disclosed.

   መረጃው እንደሚያስረዳው ከዓለም ባንክ በተደረገ ተፅእኖ ለመልሶ ማቋቋሚያ በተመደበ የገንዘብ ድጋፍ ከሠራዊቱ እንዲቀነሱ የተደረጉ እስከ 250 የሚደርሱ የሶማሊ ተወላጅ ወታደሮች «ለመልሶ ማቋቋሚያ የተመደበ ገንዘብ በባለሥልጣናት ተበልቷል፣ እኛም ችግር ላይ ወድቀናል»በማለት ጥያቄ ሲያቀርቡ ቆይተዋል። 

According to the information, in an influence form the World Bank, Soldiers who were made to get the sack with an allocated money to rehabilitate them, about 250 soldiers have been raising questions claiming "that money which was allocated to rehabilitate us was embezzled by authorities; we're in great trouble".

ተቀናሽ ወታደሮቹ ለጥያቄያቸው ምላሽ ባለማግኘታቸው በጅጅጋ ከተማ ውስጥ ከሚገኙ ፖሊሶች የጦር መሣሪያ በመቀማት ባገኙት ሁሉ ላይ በመተኮስ በርካታ ሰዎችን አቁስለዋል ተብሏል። 

Since the soldiers couldn't get responses to their requests, they snatched guns from the police force of Jijiga town and fired on all whom they encountered, injuring many people, I was said.

እስከአሁን ባለው መረጃ የሦስት ሰዎች ሕይወት መጥፋቱም ተነግሯል። 

From the evidence we have up to now, three people's lives passed way. 

ወታደሮቹ ከተማዋን ለአንድ ቀን በቁጥጥር ሥር ካደረጉ በኋላ በተደረገ ድርድር የጠየቁት ገንዘብ እንዲከፈላቸው በመደረጉ አመፁ ሊበርድ መቻሉን ምንጮቻችን ገልጠዋል።

After the soldiers put under control the town for a day, they were paid the money they had asked in a negotiation made, so the rebellion was able to calm down, our sources disclosed. 

   ይህ በዚህ እንዳለም በሶማሊ ብሔራዊ ክልል ምክር ቤት ሥራ አስፈፃሚዎች መሀከል የተፈጠረ አለመግባባት ወደከፋ ደረጃ እየተገፋ በመሄዱ የክልሉ ባለሥልጣናት አዲስ አበባ ተጠርተው በአቶ ሀሰን ሽፋና በጠቅላይ ሚኒስትር መለስ አማካይነት በሚመራ ስብሰባ በመደራደር ላይ መሆናቸውን ከጠቅላይ ሚኒስትሩ ጽ/ቤት ምንጮች ከተገኘው መረጃ ለማረጋገጥ ተችሏል።

In the mean time, the misunderstandings created among the executives of Somali Regional Administration Council have worsened and, hence, the regional officials were called to Addis Ababa to negotiates in the presence of Mr. Hassen Shifa and Prime Minister Meles, sources from the Prime Minister Office proved. 

   ከጅጅጋ ያገኘነው መረጃ እንደሚያስረዳው የሶማሊያ ክልል መንግሥት ባለሥልጣናት ለሁለት የተከፈሉ ሲሆን አንደኛው ወገን በአምባሳደር መሀመድ ድሪር የሚመራ ነው ተብሏል። 

According to the information we got from Jijiga, officials of the Somali Region Administration were divided in to two, one of which was said to be led by Ambassador Mohammed Derir.

በዚህ ቡድን ሥር አቶ አብዲ ዓሊ ሽጋ የክልሉ የፋይናንስ ኢኮኖሚ ዘርፍ ኃላፊ፣ አቶ አደን ቢሌ የክልሉ ምክትል ፕሬዚዳናት አቶ አብዲ ራሆ የክልሉ ማኅበራዊ ዘርፍ ኃላፊ ይጠቀሳሉ። 

Under this group, Mr. Abdi Ali Shega, Head of the region's Finance sector, Mr. Aden bile, Deputy President of the Region, Mr. Abdi Raho, and Head of the social sector.         

ሌላው ቡድን ደግሞ በወቅቱ የክልሉ ፕሬዚዳንት በአቶ አብዱልረሺድ ዱላኔ የሚመራው መሆኑን ለጉዳዩ ቅርበት ያላቸው ምንጮች ገልጠዋል።

The other group was led by the present president of the region Mr. Abdulreshid Dulane, close sources to the issue disclosed. 

   ይህ የክልሉ ባልሥልጣናት አለመግባባት ከምን እንደመነጨ ባይታወቅም፣ የሥልጣንና የጥቅም ሽኩቻ ሳይሆን አይቀርም የሚሉ ታዛቢዎች አሉ።

Although the cause of the misunderstanding of the regional officials was not known, observers say that power struggle and fight for benefits may have been the reason. 

                             ከጦማር ጥር 21 ቀን 1994

                          From Tomar January 29, 2002  
