

                  «ምን ዓይነት ፍርድ እንደሚሠጠኝ አውቀዋለሁ» አቶ ቢተው በላይ

            "I know what kind of Verdict it would Pass on me," Mr. Bitew Belay 

   የፌዴራሉ ከፍተኛ ፍርድ ቤት አንደኛ ወንጀል ችሎት በአጃቢ ፍትህ ሚኒስቴር ሄደው ማስረጃቸውን እንዲያመጡ የፈቀደላቸው ሦስተኛ ተከሳሽ አቶ ንጉሴ ኃይሉ ከሚኒስቴር መሥሪያ ቤት ምንም ዓይነት ማስረጃ ሊያገኙ አለመቻላቸውን አስታወቁ።

The third accused Mr. Nigussie Hailu was allowed by the Federal High court first criminal bench to go and bring, being escorted, documents from the ministry of Justice but disclosed that he couldn't find any. 

   የፌዴራሉ የሥነ ምግባርና የፀረ-ሙስና ኮሚሽን አቃቤ ሕግ በሙስና ክስ ከመሠረታባቸው ውስጥ ሦስተኛው ተከሳሽ አቶ ንጉሴ ኃይሉ ትላንት ለፍርድ ቤቱ እንደተናገሩት የፍትህ ሚኒስቴር ከአቶ ታምራት ላይኔ ጉዳይ ውጪ የእሳቸውን የተመለከተ ማስረጃ የለኝም ስላለኝ የራሴን ባለ 15 ገፅ መቃወሚያ አቅርቤያለሁ ብለዋል። 

Among the individuals the Federal Ethics and Anti-corruption commission prosecutor changed in corruption case, the third accused Mr. Nigussie Hailu spoke to the court yesterday that as the ministry of justice doesn't have any evidence on me except the case of Tamrat Layne, I have brought a-15-page counter oppositions, he said.

ወንጀል ምርመራ ማስተባባሪያ ተወካይ ጥር 7/1994 ለፍርድ ቤቱ የአቶ ንጉሴ ማስረጃዎች እኛ ጋር ሳይሆን ፍትህ ሚኒስቴር ነው የሚገኘው ማለታቸው የሚታወስ ሲሆን አቶ ንጉሴም ይሄንኑ ለፍርድ ቤቱ አስገንዝበዋል።

It was to be recalled that the rep of crime investigation coordination said to the court on January 15/2002 that the evidences of Mr. Nigussie is not with us but at the Ministry of Justice, and Mr. Nigussie also made the curt realize this. 

   የትናንቱን የአቶ ንጉሴ መቃወሚያ ጨምሮ በአሁኑ ወቅት ሁሉም ተከሳሾች የመከላከያ ማስረጃቸውን ለፍርድ ቤቱ ማቅረባቸው ተገልጿል። 

Including Mr. Nigussie's counter opposition of yesterday it was disclosed that all the accused presented their defensive evidence to the court.

ይሁን እንጂ ፍርድ ቤቱ የሁሉንም ፅሁፎች ተመልክቶ ለመወሰን እንዲችል ለየካቲት 5/94 ቀጠሮ መያዝ የግድ መሆኑን አስታውቋል።

However, the court said it's mandatory to give appointment for February 13/2002 in order to be able to see all the written evidences and give decisions.

   ይህ በእንዲህ እንዳለ ቀጠሮ ከተሠጠ በኋላ ሁለተኛው ተከሳሽ አቶ ቢተው በላይ ሀሳብ እንዳቀርብ ይፈቀድልኝ በማለት አቤቱታቸውን አሠምተዋል። 

In the mean time, after the appointment date was given, the second accused Mr. Bitew Belay said, let me present an idea and expressed his appeal.

ስምንት ወር ሙሉ በቀጠሮ ብቻ እመላለሳለሁ ብዬ አልገምትኩም ነበር ያሉት አቶ ቢተው የፍርድ ሂደቱ አጥሮ ትክክለኛ ፍርድ እንዲሰጠኝ እጠይቃለሁ ብለዋል። 

I didn't expect to come and go only with appointment for eight months, and I ask if the judgment process become shortened and be given the right verdict, he said.

በርግጥ ምን ዓይነት ፍርድ እንደሚሰጠኝ አውቀዋለሁ ያሉት አቶ ቢተው የሚሠጠውንም ፍርድ በፀጋ እንደሚቀበሉ ተናግረዋል። 

Indeed I know what kind of verdict it would pass on me, said Mr. Bitew, but I would accept the verdict anyway.

እንደሳቸው አስተያየት የተወሰነውን የፍርድ ዓመት ተቀብለው በወደፊት ሕይወታቸውና ሥራቸው አረፍ ብለው ማሠብ ይፈልጋሉ። 

According to him, he would like to know the verdict passed on him and would like to think of his future life and work in a peaceful frame of mind.

አቶ ቢተው የተሠጠውን ፍርድ እቀበላለሁ ይበሉ እንጂ እኔ ንፁህ ነኝም ብለዋል ለፍርድ ቤቱ።

Although Mr. Bitew said that he'd accept whatever verdict passed on him, he also stated that he's guiltless to the court.

   የፌዴራሉ ከፍተኛ ፍ/ቤት የአንደኛ ወንጀል ችሎት አስተያየታቸውን ከሠማ በኋላ መልስ ሰጥቷቸዋል በሰጣቸው ምላሽ ፍ/ቤቱ እርስዎ የሚሰጠውን ፍርድ ከወዲሁ ቢያውቁትም እኛ ግን ገና አናውቀውም ብሏል። 

The first criminal bench of the Federal High Court after having listened to his suggestions gave him a response saying that although you claimed to know the verdict before it passed, we still don't know it now.

ይህን የሚወስነው የፍርዱ ሂደትና የሚቀርቡት ሠነዶችም ተገናዝበው መሆኑም አመልክቷል።

What decides this is the judiciary process and the analysis of evidences presented, the court disclosed.

   በሌላ በኩል ታህሳስ 30/94 የኢትዮጵያ ንግድ ባንክ ፕሬዚዳንት አቶ ጥላሁን አባይን ጨምሮ 54 የመንግሥት ባለሥልጣናትና ነጋዴዎች በተከሰሱበት ወቅት ያልቀረቡት 16ኛው ተከሳሻ አቶ ዓለማየሁ ዘገየ ትናንት በዚህ ችሎት ቀርበዋል።

On the other hand, when the 54 government officials, inclusive of Ethiopian Commercial Bank president, Mr. Tilahun Abay, and business people were accused on January 8/2002, the 16th accused Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye, who did not appear then, appeared on this court session yesterday.

   16ኛው ተከሳሽ የቀረበባቸው ክስ ከሌሎች 25 ተከሳሾች ጋር በሚና ትሬዲግ ኃላፊነቱ የተወሰነ የግል ማህበር ስም 190 ሚሊዮን 218 ሺህ 700 ብር ከኢትዮጵያ ንግድ ባንክ አንዋር መስጊድ ቅርንጫፍ አላግባብ እንዲወሰድ ፈቅደዋል የሚል ነው።

The 16the accused was charged with other 25 accused individuals of illegally allowing 190 million 218 thousand 700 Birr to be taken on money laundering from Ethiopian commercial bank of Ethiopia, Anwar Mosque Branch.  

   ተከሳሹ ከኢትዮጵያ ንግድ ባንክ በ1985 ዓ.ም በጡረታ መውጣታቸውን ጠቅሰው የተዘረዘሩት ልዩ ልዩ ብድሮች ሲሰጡ በቦታው አለመኖራቸውን ተናግረዋል። 

The accused stated that he went out of his job from Commercial Bank of Ethiopia, retiring in 1993 and, therefore, he wasn't in his position when the alleged debts were given.

ከዚህ አንፃር ክሱ እንደማያስጠይቃቸውና የዋስ መብታቸው ተከብሮ እንዲከራከሩ ፍርድ ቤቱን ጠይቀዋል። 

From this angle the accusation doesn't make him accountable and, therefore, asked the court his bail right and continue to dispute his case.

አቃቤ ህግ ግን የቀረበባቸው ክስ የሙስና ወንጀል በመሆኑ የዋስትና መብታቸው እንዳይከበር ለፍርድ ቤቱ አመልክቷል። 

The prosecutor however, said since his case was a corruption one, he asked the court not to give him the right to be released on bail.

ጉዳዮን የተመለከተው ፍርድ ቤትም ለ16ኛው ተከሳሽ አቶ ዓለማየሁ ዘገየ የዋስተና መብት እንደማይፈቀድ በማዘዙ ወህኒ ቤት ተልከዋል።

The court viewing the case ordered that it won't give the right to be released on bail for the 16th accused Mr. Alemayehu Zegeye, and he was sent to prison.  

                            ከዘፕሬስ ጥር 22 ቀን 1994

                       From the Press, January 30, 2002  
