

ምዕራፍ፡፳፩።

Chapter 21

የምኒልክ የመጨረሻ ዘመኖች የታሪኩ ማጠቃለያ።

The Last Epoch of Menelik- The Conclusion of the chronicle

የሺ፱፻ኛው ዓመት መጀመሪያ ዓመቶች በኢትዮጵያ ብዙ አዳዲስ ነገሮች የታዩበትና የተጀመሩበት ዘመን ነው።

In Ethiopia the first years of the 19th century were times when many new things were seen and started. 

በዚህም ላይ አጤ ምኒልክ ወዲያው ሕመማቸውና ድካም ጀመራቸው እንጂ ከሥልጣኔ ጀማሪነትም ምስጋናው ይደርሳቸዋል።

Moreover, Emperor Menilik all of a sudden became ill and started to become weak although he deserves appreciation for bringing civilization. 

በትምህርት ረገድ የአገራቸው ሕዝብ እንዲተጋ ትምህርት እንዴት ያለ ዋጋ ያለው መሆኑንም ተገንዝቦ መማር እንዲጀምር ለማትጋት መሞከራቸውን ጥብቅ የሆነው ስለ ትምህርት ግዴታ ያወጡት አዋጅ ይነግረናል።

With regards to education his attempts so as to make his country's people assiduous, and to enable them understand the value of education and start learning could be seen form the strict proclamation he issued.

« ሞዓ አንበሳ ዘእምነገደ ይሁዳ ዳግማዊ ምኒልክ ንጉሠ ነገሥት ዘኢትዮጵያ » እስካሁን ማንም የእጅ ሥራ አዋቂ የነበረ ሰው በውርደት ስም ይጠራ ነበር ስለዚህም ማንም ሰው ለመማርና ለመሠልጠን የሚደክም አልነበረም።

"Conquering Lion of the tribe of Judah Menelik II Emperor of Ethiopia" up to now anyone with a skillful hands to do thins used to be called names, therefore, nobody used to work hard to learn and train.   

በዚህ ጎጂ በሆነ ሁኔታ ብንኖር ቤተ ክርስቲያኖች ይዘጋሉ ይልቁንም ክርስቲያንነት አይገኝም።

If we line with such harmful situation, churches would be closed, above all, Christianity wouldn't e found.

በሌሎች አገሮች እያንዳንዱን ነገር ብቻ መማር ሳይሆን አዳዲስ ነገሮችም ይሠራሉ።

In other countries not only would they learn each thing, but they also do new things.

ስለዚህ ከዛሬ ጀምሮ ለወደፊት ወንድ ልጆችና ሴት ልጆች ሁሉ ከስድስት ዓመታቸው በኋላ ወደ ትምህርት ቤት እንዲገቡ ይሁን።

Therefore, let all boys and girls enter school offer their six years of age.  

ልጆቻቸውን ለማስተማር የማይተጉ ቤተሰቦች ወላጆቻቸው ሲሞቱ ንብረታቸው ለልጆቹ መሆኑ ቀርቶ ለመንግሥት ይተላለፋል።

Families who are not attentive to teach their children, when the parents die their properties would the transferred to the government, instead of to their children.  

ተማሪ ቤቶችንና አስተማሮችን የሚያዘጋጀው መንግሥቴ ነው።

It's my government which prepares students and teachers. 

ሺ፰፻፺፱ ዳግማዊ ምኒልክ »።

1899, Emperor Menelik".

ይህ ጥብቅ የሆነው በርስትና በንብረት መወረስ እቀጣሃለሁ ተብሎ የታወጀው የማሥጋት አዋጅ በዚህ ረገድ የነበራቸውን ታላቅ አሳብ ያሳያል።

The issuance of this strict proclamation of confiscation of ownership of land and property is one doesn't comply with education legislative decree showed his great intention with regards to education. 

ስለዚህ ለመጀመሪያ ጊዜ በኤውሮጳው ዓይነት ለማስተማር እንዲጀመር ከግብጽ አገር አስተማሮች አስመጥተው ዛሬም በስማቸው የሚጠራውን የዳግማዊ ምኒልክን ተማሪ ቤት በሺ፱፻ ዓመተ ምህረት ከፈቱ።

So, for the first time, to start European education, he brought teachers form Egypt an opened a school which is called up to now in his name the Menelik II school in 1908.

ይህም ለአንድ ሕዝብ ሥልጣኔ መጀመሪያ መግቢያው መንገድ መሆኑን በማሰብ ነው።

He did this thinking that it is the first road for a nation's civilization.

በዚያ ጊዜ ማንበብና መጻፍን ማወቅ ለቤተ ክህነት አገልግሎትና አንዳንድም ጸሐፊ ለመሆን ካሰበ ሰው በቀር ሥራዬ ብሎ የሚደክምበት አልነበረም።

During that time, unless one wanted to use it for clerical services in the church or to be a writer, no one took the skills of reading and writing seriously.

ብዙ መሻሻልና የሚቋቋም አስፈላጊ ነገር እንደ ነበረ እርግጥ ነው።

Indeed there were many important things that used to be improved and established.

ግን በጦርነት አገርን ከማቅናት የመጣባቸውንም ጠላት ከመከላከል ሰላምንም ለሕዝባቸው ከመመሥረት አልፈው ሌሎችን ነገሮችና የአስተዳደሩን ዓይነት በጣሙን ለማሻሻል በቂ ጊዜ አላገኙም።

However, he didn't get enough time for other things and improve greatly the administration apart from developing a nation at a time of war, protecting the enemy that came and establishing peace to his people.

የምኒልክ የጸጥታ ዘመኖች ናቸው ከምንላቸው ከዓድዋ ጦርነት ወዲህ ካሉት ዓመቶችም ፮ቱ አጤ ምኒልክ በሕመም ምክንያት ከቤት ስለዋሉ በተፈጥሮ የነበራቸው ትጋትና ጥንካሬ እየደከመ ሔዶ ብዙውን ሥራ አሰናክሎታል።

Out of what we callas Menelik's peaceful era, the years after the Adowa war, 6 years were the time when emperor Menelik was obliged to stay at home due to illness, and as a result, his natural diligence and strength became weakened and hindered most of the work. 

የመጀመሪያው የሥራ መሰልቸትና የሕመም ስሜት መሞከር የጀመራቸው በሺ፰፻፺፯ ዓ.ም ግድም ነው።

The first feeling of weariness and illness seemed to have started around 1905.

የምክር ስብሰባ ሲደረግም የወትሮው ንቃትና ሥራ ወዳድነት ነገሩንም በትዕግሥትና በማስተዋል ከመከታተል መሰልቸት ይታይባቸው ጀመረ።

At a time of consultation meeting, a feeling of boredom was seen on him rather than the usual alertness and motivation for work and understanding with patience.

ጠንካራ የነበረው ሰውነታቸውም የመዛል ዓይነት መልክ አበጀ።

His strong body seemed to have become wearied.

የነበራቸው ዋና አሳብ ይህን በብዙ ድካም ያሰፉትንና ያቋቋሙትን አንድ የሆነ የኢትዮጵያ መንግሥት ግዛታቸውን በማይናወጥ ዓይነት ላሳደግዋቸው የልጅ ልጃቸው ለልጅ ኢያሱ በጠነከረ መሠረት ለማስተላለፍ ነበር።

His main intention was to transfer in a strong base to his grandson whom he fostered, the one Ethiopian government which was a stable territory of state which he toiled for years and established.

ስለዚህም በሺ፱፻፩ ዓ.ም ዋና ዋናዎችን አገረ ገዢዎችና ወዲያውም የጦር አዛዦች የነበሩትን ራሶች ደጃዝማቾች መኳንንቶችም ሰብስበው በጳጳሱ በአቡነ ማቴዎስ ቃል ልጅ ኢያሱ አልጋ ወራሽ እንዲሆኑ እንዳይከድዋቸውም አማልዋቸው።

Hence, in 1909 he gathered his main governors, army officials and lords before Bishop Mathewos and have them vowed that his grandson Honorable son Iyasu was to be the heir so that they wouldn't betray him.

ከዚያ ወዲህ እስከ ሞታቸው ያሉት ፮ ዘመኖች የአጤ ምኒልክ የሕመም ዘመኖች ናቸው።

After that the 6 years up to his death were emperor Menelik's time of illness. 

ሕመሙ ሲጀምራቸው ፷፯ ዓመት ሆንዋቸው ነበር።

When he was caught by illness he was 67 years old.

በነዚህ የሕመም ዘመኖች ውስጥ እቴጌ ጣይቱ የመንግሥቱን ሥልጣን ለመያዝ በብዙው ደክመዋል።

During this time of illness, impress Taitu tried her best to seize power.

ነገር ግን የንጉሠ ነገሥቱ እንደ ራስ ተሰማና እንደ ፊታውራሪ ሀብተ ጊዮርጊስያሉት ታማኝ አሽከሮች ሌሎችም መኳንንቶች በነገሩ ጠንክረውበት የእቴጌይቱ አሳብ አልተፈጸመም።

Nevertheless, the emperor, army officials like Tesema and Habte Ghiorgis who were obedient servants an other lords of the house were seriously opposed the idea of her taking power and so the empress' wish wasn't fulfilled. 

አጤ ምኒልክ እንደ ልጃቸው ይወድዋቸውና ያምንዋቸው የነበሩት የሐረርን አውራጃ ግዛት ያሰፉትና በዓድዋም ጦርነት ስማቸው በጀግንነት ሲጠራ የሚኖረው ልዑል ራስመኰንን ቀደም ብለው በሺ፱፻፺፰ አርፈው ነበር።

Prince Mekonnen whom Menelik likes and trusts as his own son and who expands the Harar Province and whose name is mentioned as a hero during the Adowa war died earlier in 1906.         

ራስ ተሰማም ቆይተው አጤ ምኒልክ ሕመሙ ጠንቶባቸው ሳለ በሺ፱፻፫ ዓ.ም ከንጉሠ ነገሥቱ በፊት ሞቱ።

Army official Tesema, too died at a time when emperor Menelik was seriously ill in 1911 just before the emperor's death. 

እነዚህን በታሪክ ከፍ ያሉትንና የማይረሱ የሆኑትን እንደተከበረ አልማዝ ጉልህ ሆነው የሚያንጸባርቁትን ሞያዎች ሁሉ የሠሩት አጤ ምኒልክ በሕመማቸው ጊዜ በመንግሥታቸው ውስጥ ይደረጉ የነበሩትን ምናልባትም ለአሳባቸው የማይስማሙትን ጉዳዮች እስከ ሞታቸው ዘመን እስከ ሺ፱፻፮ ዓ.ም ድረስ እየሰሙ መታገሥ ግድ ሆኖባቸው ነበር።

Emperor Menelik who had done all great things in history and unforgettable, the skills of which he brought about were worthy an glittering like a diamond, was forced to patiently hear in his illness unto death in 1914 things that were being done in his government, which may probably be against his will.  

በግዛታቸው ፴፭ ዘመኖች ውስጥ ከፍ ያሉ አስቸጋሪ የነበሩትን ነገሮች በመልካም ዕድልና ትእግሥት በእውቀትም አለፍዋቸው።

In his 35 years of power, he over came very difficult situations with luck patience and wisdom.

ዘመናቸው ብዙ ትግል የነበረበት ከፍ ያለ ቆራጥነት የሚያስፈልገውና ዕረፍት የሌለበት ጊዜ ነበር።

His time of power had a lot of struggle and needed great sacrifice and de void of repose.

በዚህ ትግል ከርሳቸው በፊት የነበሩ ፪ ጀግኖች ንጉሦች የደከሙበትን የአጤ ቴዎድሮስን ኢትዮጵያን አንድ የማድረግ ምኞቶችና የአጤ ዮሐንስን የአገር ፍቅር ቅናት በማስተባበር የሁለቱንም ነገሥታት ዓላማ የነበረውን የኢትዮጵያን ስፋትና መደርጀት አንድነትም የማስገኘትን የክብር አክሊል በታሪክ እርሳቸው ታደሉት።

In this struggle, he was able to receive the prestigious crown of history through his accomplishment, in being able to combine the wishes of the two heroic kings, Emperor Tewdros, who wished to make Ethiopia one, and Emperor Yohannes, who displayed a great love for his country, and in doing so, Menelik could make Ethiopia wide and strong.

ከዚህ በኋላ የቀረው እርሳቸው የታገሉበትንና የደከሙበትን እርምጃ ተከትሎ በማስፋፋት መያዝና ማቆየት ብቻ ነበር።

After this what remained was through following his steps holding fast and preserve what he struggled and toiled for.

አጤ ምኒልክ ለአንድ ንጉሥ ከሁሉ የበለጠ ከሆነው ተግባሩ በፍርድ ረገድም አድላዊነት የሌለባቸው ቀጥተኛና እውነተኛውን ነገር ወዳጅ በደለኛውን እንደሚገባው የሚቀጡ ለተበደለውም መብቱን የሚጠብቁ አመዛዛኝ ዳኛ ነበሩ።

Emperor Menelik also was a fair judge, that was expected from a king above any other work, who loves straight and truthful things, and who properly punished the wrong doer, and for the one who was done wrong, he kept it rights. 

ለተጐዳ ደሀም ረዳቱና ደጋፊው ርኅሩኅም በመሆን የታወቀ ስም ነበራቸው።

He was also popular for his generosity to the poor and being compassionate supporter.

በኢትዮጵያ መሬት ቀላድ ተጥሎ ደንብ ያለው የመሬት ስፍር ከተደረገ በኋላ « በእኔ ጊዜ ርስት ያልተተከልክና የፈለግህም ወደ ተወለድክበት አገር ያልገባህ አገርህም ሳትገባ ርስትም ሳትይዝ ትቀራለህ » የሚሉ ንጉሥ ነበሩ።

He was a king who used to say in Ethiopian land, after the right land measurement had been make with a long leather or rope, "If during my reign, anyone doesn't take hold of land and those who preferred to get in to your province of birth, you'll remain without land as well as remain staying where you are."

ስለዚህም በደግነታቸውና በአዛኝነታቸው ርኅርኅት እናት የምትጠራበትን በሕዝባቸውም ዘንድ ለሁልጊዜ የማይረሳውን ስም « እምዬ ምኒልክ » ተብሎ መጠራትን አተረፉ።

So, due to his generosity and mercifulness, he used to be called by the name a compassionate mother is called and an unforgettable title among his people "motherly Menelik".

ካፓ ላንቃ ፈረስ በቅሎ ብርና በሬ ላምም ይሰጡት የነበረው ካህኑ ነጋዴውና ገበሬው ሕዝብ ከአጤ ምኒልክ የዕረፍት ጊዜ ከታህሣሥ ፫ ቀን ፲፱፻፮ ዓ.ም በኋላ ሞታቸውን ምንም ቢደበቅ በሐሜትሰምቶት ስለነበረ ነገሩ ሆዱን በልቶት በየሥራው ላይ በግጥም።

The priests, merchants and farmers whom Menelik used to give mantle, soft palate-horse, mule, silver, and oxen and cows, though officially his death, was obscured after December 11, 1914, his people knew from hearsay that he had passed away , and so they used to compose averse at every work place.

